CORRESPONDENCE 


RELATIVE TO THE 


AFFAIRS OF THE LEVANT. 


PART III. 


Presented to both Houses of Parliament, by Command of Her Majesty, 
1841. 


LONDON: 


PRINTED BY T. R. HARRISON. 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2026 


https://archive.org/details/correspondence-relative-to-the-affairs-of-the-levant_1841_part-3 


No. 1 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


Earl Granville 


To Earl Granville...... 


EP) 


Lord William Russell.... 


Mr. Larking. .... cesses 
Lord Ponsonby ........ 


9 


Lord Beauvale..... «eve 


To Lord Beauvale...... 


To Lord Ponsonby ..... 


Mr. Bloomfield......0+¢ 


Lord Ponsonby ......-++ 


PART III. 


Noy. 2, 1840 | Communication made to M. Guizot 


13, 
Oct. 26, 


6, 
19, 
20, 
28, 


28, 
28, 
Nov. 1, 


14, 


14, 


9; 


Oct. 31, 


31, 


21, 


by Count Appony on Eastern 
Affairs. . 

Has transmitted to M. Guizot a ‘copy 
of Lord Palmerston’s despatch of 
November 2.706 sein. siactae eke 

Conversation with M Guizot on the 
Turco-Egyptian Question ...... 

Respecting the proposition sent by 
M. Guizot to M. de Bourqueney, 
for the consideration of the Bri- 
tish Government..........5.. +5 

Engagements of ae of July 
must be fulfilled. . ee aoe 

The Four Powers must execute the 
arrangements of Treaty of July . 

Baron Werther approves instructions 
to Lord Ponsonby of October 15, 
respecting deprivation of Mehemet 

Lia, SP AES RNIN Lester testa Pir Sey 

Fortifications of Alexandria, Dis- 
content among Turkish sailors .. 

Despatches from Syria up to Octo- 
ber 12. Battle of the 10th .... 

Despatch from Sir R. Stopford of 
October 7-1256. 2st += ot 

Prince Metternich has delayed send- 
ing instructions to Internuncio to 
concur with Lord Ponsonby in 
measure pointed out in the des- 
pate of Octoher 2h: s secu «ve 4: 

Amount of succour to be sent by 
AUSWIa 10 SyVia .c ecw mene: 

Nature of Prince eee in- 
structions . 


Has caintauniented . Price Met- 


ternich substance of Mr. Wood’s 
letter of October 8. Prince Met- 
ternich will instruct Internuncio to 
co-operate with Lord Ponsonby... 
Answer to despatch of October 28, 
respecting the instructions to Lord 
Ponsonby of October 15. ...... 
To express gratification of Her Ma- 
jesty’s Government at succour to 
be sent by Austria to Syria...... 
To urge appointment of some better 
fitted person to Syria than Izzet 
Lap} Ea eee karina OG arate 
Has communicated to Count Nes- 
selrode instructions to Lord Pon- 
sonby, of October 15........5. 
Conversation with Count Nesselrode 
on M. Thiers’ despatches of 3rd 
and 8th instant 
Mr. Wood’s letters to Syrian Chiefs 


ee 


Page 


13 


14 
15 


15 


15 
16 | 
16 
16 
17 | 


Wi 
18 


No 21 


22 


23 


24 


25 
26 


27 


28 


29 


30 
31 


32 
33 


34 


35 


36 


37 


38° 


39 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


Memorandum of Novem- 


Earl Granville......... 


? 


To Earl Granville...... 


Sir C. Smith .. <s 


?? 


29 


NEE) DAPKUS, po ss ee : 


”» 


ord Beawvalene. Je «ere 


Earl Granville......... 
To Earl Granville...... 
To Lord Ponsonby ... 


Lord Ponsonby ........ 


”? 


To Lord Ponsonby . 
Lord William Russell . 


Mr. Bloomfield ........ 


‘| To Mr. Bloomfield...... 


Earl Granville........ 


To Earl Granville...... 


Communication to be made to Me- 
hemet Ali, on the part of the 
Four Powers, by Sir Robert Stop- 
LOLA} Seuss chavs od O58 REO omer 


Nov. 14, 1840.] Offer to be made to Mehemet Ali to 


Sept. 


Nov. 


14, 


14, 


18, 
13, 


16, 


16, 


16, 


] oh 
2, 


14, 
22, 


. 16, 


28, 


. 14, 


16, 


20, 


20, 


Vie 


recommend that he should be rein- 
stated in Egypt, if he submits im- 
mediately PATE BML, Se ORE 

As to Mehemet Ali’s desire for here- 
ditary tenure of Egypt ..... 

Admiral Stopford not to suspend 
operations in consequence of com- 
munication to Mehemet Ali .. 

Conversation with M. Guizot on 
Eastern Question presets fmcbe es 

Effect produced in Paris by Lord 
Palmerston’s despatch of Nov. 2. 

Respecting communications made by 
M. de Bourqueney to Lord Pal- 
MELStON —sieis)., Sie ss a eee ae 

Copies of three letters to Admiralty 
of November 14. Communication 
to be made by Sir Robert Stop- 
ford to Mehemet Ali»..... 

M. Guizot right in stating that Lord 
Palmerston said it is not the in- 
tention of the Allies to expel Me- 
hemet Ali from Egypt. Probable 
effect of Sir Robert Stopford’s in- 
SELUCHLONS. oiecetuasuteccast ele ete 

Question of his going to Constanti- 
nople .. 

Satisfactory resi of hist vine ia. Con- 
stantinople 

Occupation of Beyrout ... 

Evacuation of Tripoli, Teteee and 
Latakia: : Ibrahim at Zahle . 

Works at Alexandria. Detection of 
Emir Bechir, and retreat of Soly- 
manbPasha esos oes oe eiele fe 

Measures taking by Mehemet Ali to 
support Ibrahim. French influ- 


Motive for Panes Metternich’s last 
despatches to Paris. «His opinions 
as to terms which may eventually 
be granted to-Mehemet Ali 

Respecting suggestions of Prince 
Metternich for settlement of East- 
erm: Question eee eee 

The Allied Powers will not concede 
to France under M. Guizot, what 
they refused to concede to France 
under M. Thiers. . 

Copies of cerecuoae ye Adm 
ralty of this date .. : 

Presentation of Ibrahim’s flag ‘to 
the: Sultanz* 237. ee eee eee 

Letter to Admiral Stopford about 
blockade. ks soee eee been ne 

Operations in Syria.............. 

Memorandum of Plenipotentiaries 
of the Four Powers of the 14th 
November. <... . Sinatisel. bet. 

Baron Werther denies having made 
propositions to Baron Bresson re- 
specting Treaty of 15th of ra 

Russian Cabinet will wait events . 

Baron Brunnow’s conduct ........ 

Has communicated to M. Guizot 
Lord Palmerston’s instructions to 
Sir Robert Stopford........... 

Information received at Paris from 
Count Walewski, respecting dejec- 
tion of Mehemet Ali and the 
Egyptians» 5°") S008 4. ek ee 


Page 


21 


23 


24 


24 
24 
25 


25 


26 


26 
26 
26 
27 
28 


29 


29 


30 
31 
31 
32 
32 
33 
33 


34 


34 
34 
35 


35 


36 


Lord Ponsonby 


” 


To Lord Ponsonby 
once eens 
bP) 
M. Laurin 3) .... 
M. Steindl 


Lord Ponsonby 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


Oct. 


Earl Granville .,...... 


” 


To Mr. Bloomfield. . 


Lord William Russell ... 
Earl Granville..-...... 


” 


| To Earl Granville 


Lord William Rusa RE 


Sir C. Smith 


Lord Pai sonby 
Mr. Larking 


To Lord Ponsonby...... 


Lord Beauvale 


To Lord Beauvale 
Earl Granville 


To Earl Granville 


Noy. 


Noy. 


Dec. 


Nov. 


8, 1840. 


20, 


. 12, 


15, 


Correspondence with the Porte on 
delay of blockade of Alexandria. 
Paper respecting future Government 

of Candia. . sere 

Answer to despatch respecting Candia 

Information from Alexandria. . 

Denial to Rechid Pasha of reported 
disapprobation of England of de- 
privation of Mehemet Ale. Bd 

Korces, &e:, of tbrahim).. 9). ...- 

Forces, &e., of Ibrahim. State of 
affairs in the Lebanon. . 

Letter from Mr. Wood, respecting 
his proceedings with various Sheiks 

Details of the debate in the Cham- 
ber of Deputies on the Address. . 

Telegraphic despatch, stating that 
Ibrahim has been ordered to retire 
with his troops. Letter from Mehe- 
met Ali to the King of the French 

Satisfaction at despatch to Earl Gran- 
ville of November 2. Bh Ae 

Feelings of Russia on the Eastem 
Queltion Ryeentes ee Te eenc are ee 

Inconvenience of France being party 
to final. Turkish arrangement .... 

News received of capture of Acre.. 

Respecting intervention of France 
between Pasha and Sultan. An- 
swer of France to the Pasha .. 

Discussion in the Chamber of Depu- 
ties onthe AddresSem) preemies oo 

Satisfaction of Her Majesty’s Go- 
vernment. at the advice given to 
Mehemet Ali by the French Go- 


VETIMENE 2 clene wie ens code cciee «sue 


Baron Werther’s opinion on Eastern 


QUESTION iat ow wcbteiws ies 2s 
Capture of Acre. . 
Stores, &c., captured at ‘Acre 
Ewadtation, of Jaffa 
His state of health no obstacle to the 
performance of his duties 
Evacuation of Jerusalem 
On the appointment of Col. Michell 
Accounts from Mr. Wood......... 
Mehemet Ali complains of France. 
Mehemet Ali submits.......... 
Negotiations between Commodore 
Napier and Mehemet Ali....... 
Mehemet Ali agrees to Commodore 
Napier’s proposals, and will eva- 
cuate Syria, &c. ... escerres 2's 
Recall of Izzet Pasha. ‘Instructions 
to Mr. Wood. Accounts from 


CAN ces oo. ss ae etoe aeaeete 

Steps to be taken for raising Syrian 
blockade... fants itn ao faites ale 

Approving arrangements respecting 
Mr. Wood. Future sapere 
of Syria. . 

Prince “Metternich’s opinion as to 
the future Government of sch 
by the Sultan. . 

Respecting future " Government ‘of 
SUE anen.s cipierre Dea ok oh the 6s 

“ Moniteur,” containing account of 
negotiation preceding Mehemet 
Ali’s acceptance of Commodore 
Napier’s conditions ............ 

Copies of Commodore Napier’s letter 
to Lord Palmerston and of de- 
spatch to the Admiralty, with cor- 
respondence with Boghos Bey.... 


65 


65 
66 


70 


70 


70 


7) 


71 


71 


No. 


85 
86 
87 


88 
89 


90 


91 


92 


93 


94 


95 


96 
97 


98 


09 


100 


101 


102 


103 
104 


105 
106 
107 
109 
110 
111 


112 


113 
114 


115 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


Commodore Napier .. . 


Admiraloyy sf. a0 2+ «iv Dec. 14, 
73 15, 
Mr. Bloomfield ........ 1, 
” 1, 
Count Nesselrode ...... peers 18 
November 19 
” .. December 1 ? 
To Admiralty... v2.0.5 %. Dec. 15, 
To Lord Ponsonby ..... We 
To Earl Granville...... 18, 
Earl Granville ........ 18, 
To Earl Granville...... 22> 
Farl Granville. ... sciee PALS 
Lord Beauvale ........ 15; 
Rechid Pasha. vans os «siel) NOW. 20, 
Lord Ponsonby ........ 25, 
” 30, 
Earl Granville .........| Dec. 25, 
Lord Ponsonby ........ 8, 
» 8, 
Sir C. Smith .. -. | Nov. 24, 
” 29; 
” Dec. 6, 
Mr. Latking Jv ci 6 6, 
Harl Granville Ju... cee Jan. 1, 1841 
Lord Ponsonby........| Dec. 9, 1840 
Lord Clanricarde....... 22; 
Count Nesselrode ...... oe 


To Lord Clanricarde.. 


Admiralty. ve vee dese 


Jan. 11, 1841 
IT; 


16, 


..| Nov. 26, 1840 | Result of his negotiations with the 


Pasha of Egypt .....-.-----+- 
Commodore Napier’s correspondence 
with Boghos Bey......--++-++-- 

Articles concluded between Commo- 
dore Napier and Mehemet Ali, 
November 2/7 sence, te hte 

Satisfaction of Emperor at capture of 
UNOS eee en CPM NC tI 

Count Nesselrode satisfied with com- 
munication to be made to Mehe- 
iM Gage amare GuoDodgce us 

Approval of the course stated in the 
memorandum of November 14.. 

Orders conferred by the Emperor 01 on 
Admiral Stopford and Commodore 
Napier, on the occasion of the cap- 
(ALEC UMAMOK Goce dG se aod ose 

Sir Robert Stopford to be instructed 
respecting the word “ guarantee” 
in Commodore Napier’s Articles. . 

Instructions respecting Commodore 
Napier’s Articles of agreement with 
Mehemet Ali. Relations between 
Sultan and Mehemet Ali........ 

Copy of letter to Admiralty of De- 
cember 15. To communicate it 
tomes, Guizote...-eaepe seg t leech! 4 

Respecting arrival of French Agent 
at Alexandria, mentioned in Com- 
modore Napier’s letter.......... 

M. Guizot denies having sent any 
Agent to Alexandria .......... 

Has communicated to M. Guizot 
letter to Admiralty of the 15th 
din stap ths eatin eee ts retention oto 

Attempt of M. Pontois to intluce 
the Porte to leave Candia to Me- 
hemet Ali. Letter from Mehemet 

Alito: Louis Philippe: ..- s+ 4-6 3 

Relative to the allegation that the 
Porte had sought the intervention 
ofglirancelestnectorer herilcaeie 

Information respecting Syria and 
Egypt, communicated by the In- 
tERNUNClO).y., An weenEme as peard to 

Accounts from Syria .... 

Relating to Mission of F rench ‘Agent 
to Alexandria MO Ae Oe 

Refusal of the Porte to acknowledge 
Commodore Napier’s Articles ... 

Protest of Porte respecting Com- 
modore Napier’s Articles. In- 
struction to Chekib Effendi of 
December 8. . sé 

Ibrahim has retreated on “Damascus 

Ibrahim prepares to quit Damascus 

Ibrahim re-occupies Damascus . . 

Circular from Mehemet Ali to his 
Aawhorities it 4 ade se ee 

Conversation with M. Guizot on the 
astern Question eerie 

‘Raising of the blockade of Syrian 
CODSE ca ain) ¢ie <0 RUAN: Cvernie aes 

Conversation with Count Nesselrode 
on Turkish Affairs . 

Satisfaction of the Emperor at ‘the 
submission of Mehemet Ali. As 
to arrangement, to which France 
should béa party... 255s % whee 

Reply to his despatch of Dec. 22... 

Despatch from Sir R. Stopford, 
respecting Commodore Napier’s 
Conventiontess ieee s.20.. des 

Captain Fanshawe’s Mission to 
Alexandriats;c seach se ace eee 


Page 
71 
72 


81 


83 


85 


85 


86 


87 


88 


90 


90 


91 


el 


Or 


103 


very 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


No. 116 


117 
118 
119 


120 


121 


122 
123 
124 
125 


126 
127 


128 


129 
130 
131 
132 


133 
134 
135 


136 


137 
138 


139 


Mr. Larking ... 


99 


o> 


Lord Ponsonby........ 


Lord Clanricarde,.... 


93 


Count Nesselrode ...... 


Lord Ponsonby ........ 


2? 


To Lord Ponsonby . 


Word: Beanvaless::cc «6.6 se 


2? 


To Lord Boumcle ep tO 


22 


23 


Admiralty ......--.++- 


? 


To Lord Ponsonby ..... 


To Chekib Effendi...... 


Dec. 22, 1840 | Mission of Captain Fanshawe to Me- 


22, 
23, 
15, 


16, 


Dec, 29, 


30, 


Dec. 23, 1840. 
Jan, 4, 1841. 


Dee. 30, 


30, 
Jan. 26, 
We 


Whe 


17, 
26, 
26, 


26, 


29, 


1841 


1840 


1840 


1841 


IDEM et EA leetastrz wnt sis ee cet eee 

Letters to Sir Robert Stopford, re- 
specting disturbances in Lebanon. 

Concentration of Egyptian Pel 
at) Damascus’...... 

The Sultan expresses ection ae 
Lord Palmerston’s despatch to 
Earl Granville of November 2 . 

Arrival of Captain Fanshawe from 
Ale@randriast.cv Soci, come bok 

Conversation between Rechid Pasha 
and M. Cor, respecting Commo- 
dore Napier’s Articles.......... 

Correspondence with Commodore 
INA DIGI ES ire ett chk es 8 has 

Time requiring for preparing Turkish 
fleet at Alexandria for sea ...... 

Captain Fanshawe’s interview with 
matey CCnennGl AVAGO CG, > oO Sea oes 

Protocol of Conference between the 
Representatives and Rechid Pasha 
on December 20. we 

Translation of letier from’ Mehemet 
Ali to the Grand Vizier. . 

Prince Metternich concurs in Cena 
tions to Lord Ponsonby of Decem- 
DeES Jastrae seers Oo 

Prince Metternich considers the 
Powers cannot withdraw offer of 
hereditary tenure to Mehemet Ali. 

Language of French Ambassador on 
Eastern Affairs. . 

Opinions of Russian Government on 
present state of Eastern Question . 
Despatch to M. Titoff on Commodore 
Napier's Articles (2.5 wet ce teas 
The Porte has sent Commissioners 
to Alexandria; and applies for 
assistance of Sir R. Stopford in 
withdrawing Turkish fleet ....... 

Correspondence with Captain Fan- 
Shawew.s cre ty ten ante da) ae ae 

Advice which Lord Ponsonby should 
have given to the Porte with refer- 
ence to the question of submission 
Ofpyleheimeti Aliment ten aaron 

Austria insists upon hereditary tenure 
being granted to Mehemet Ali. 
Instructions to Admiral Bandeira . 

Prince Metternich thinks the British 
Government has abstained from 
urging the Porte to grant the here- 
ditary succession to Mehemet Ali . 

The Internuncio to call upon the other 
a Cspaeabg to co-operate with 
him. 

Measures are “taking by the Porte, 
in furtherance of the views of the 
Allies . : 

The British Government ‘has not op- 
posed the grant of hereditary suc- 
cession to Mehemet Ali ........ 

Turkish Commissioners arrived at 
Marmorice on the 8th of January . 

Probable that the Porte will grant 
hereditary tenure to Mehemet Ali. 

Reports of proceedings i in Syria. . 

Captain Fanshawe’s reports from Con- 
stantinople... . 

Conversation ah Chekib Pew re- 
specting hereditary tenure to be 
given to Mehemet Ali . ; 

Expediency of the Sultan conferring 
on Mehemet Ali abuuaee: ice 
in Egypt.. bins 4 scab 


155 


157 
159 | 
159 
160 | 


160 


155 


156 


157 
158 
159 
160 
161 


162 


163 


164 


165 
166 


167 
168 
169 
170 
171 
172 


173 
174 


175 
176 


177 


178 
179 
180 
181 
182 


183 


To Lord Ponsonby ..... Jan. 30, 1841 
A GOMTAY au a2 5 os 5's Feb 1, 
Earl Granville.......-. 1 
Mr. Larking.... Jan. 21 
4 22, 
< 23, 
To Mr, Larking........ Feb. 11, 
Lord Ponsonby ........ Agi, 3 
Lord Ponsonby ........ 10, 
” 10, 
” 13, 
To Lord Ponsonby .....| Feb. 10, 
ACTA A) CVe gauss eae 10, 
» 28, 

General Michell........ Dec. 31, 1840 

Lord ‘Ponsonby. .--) .... Jan. 21, 1841 
as Feb. 1, 
” 4, 
” 5; 
To Colonel Hodges ....| March 2, 
Admiralty .... : 3h, 
To Chekib Effendi...... 4, 
IPrOLOCOMmOl een sees 5, 
Lord Ponsonby ........ Feb. 9, 
ay) 9, 
9 14, 
Chekib Effendi ........ Mar. 11, 
Admiralty 228 « dsune sho 4. 12, 
To Chekib Effendi ..... 13; 
Admiralty . By, 
Lieutenant ye btw Jan. 23, 
PNOUMEANY G7 a ase oe a= Mar. 13 
Colonel Bridgeman ..... Jan. 26, 
” Feb. 2, 
Lieut.-Colonel Napier... DE 
Mr. Consul Moore...... I 
Earl] Granville . Mar. 12, 


To Lord Clanricarde. . 
To Lord Wm. Russell . 
To Lord Beauyale.... 
To Earl Granville.... 


|r. Lord Ponsonby .. 


‘TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


.| Copy of a note’ of this day to Chekib 


Effendi .0 ccs ee eee 

Mehemet Ali surrenders the Turkish 
Fleet . 

Satisfaction “expressed by M. Cuzet 
at language held in Parliament, 
respecting France. . : 

Agricultural and einetel mono- 
‘polies i in Egypt 

Departure of Turkish fleet for Mar- 


2 0 wb @ 6) © 6% elo. 4, 1¢ 08) 0.@. 


LOT) Ucbcngn coc uicao. 01 ticiclg ctr Sic 
Commercial Convention must be exe- 
cuted in Beypt.c- os ssnee ose 
Letter from Grand Vizier to Mehe- 
MEtLAL 2 ais Rem beers ms seers 
Correspondence between the Repre- 
sentatives on a proposition made 
by the Internuncio 
Letters from Mr. Larking and Boghos 
Bey to Admiral Stopford, respecting 
Tbrahim’s position....i;....- ++ 4. 
Instructions sent to Mazloum Bey, 
respecting hereditary tenure to be 
granted to Mehemet Ali 
Approval of his conduct respecting 
hereditary tenure 
Reports from Commodore Napier, 
at Alexandria, up to January 23 . 
Sir Robert Stopford proceeds to Malta 
Operations in Syria Ger 
The Internuncio’s Reports from ‘Syria, 
Upto Jammarye lO sow cece: ee 
Correspondence with M. M. Sturmer 
and Titow, respecting measures for 
settlement of Eastern Question . 
Particulars of Conference with Re- 
chid Pasha. Conditions to be im- 
posed on Mehemet Ali.......... 
Letters from Mehemet Ali to the 
Grand Vizier . eens. eae 
To return to Mermndra. Beatie t ge 
Operations in Syria. Death of Ge- 
merale Viichell Weeeserse tom erererecre 
Arrival of Turkish fleet at Marmo- 
rice, and evacuation of Syria..... 
The Consuls of the Four Powers to 
return'to Alexandria ........%.. 
Rewards given by Mehemet Ali to the 
ex-Capudan Pasha .S 22... 
Article in “ Moniteur Ottoman,” re- 
specting Mehemet Ali. 
Conditions attached to Hereditary 
Government of Egypt.......... 
Firmans granted to Mehemet Ali on 
February. 1S. gett t.t.ce. 0 eLeeee 
Evacuation 6f Syrids oo. a. < +. eae 
Respecting the Firmans of the 13th 
of February . 
Details respecting ‘evacuation ‘of Syria 
Arrival of orders from Mehemet Ali 
for evacuation of Syria ........ 
Evacuation of Syria and numbers of 
Egyptian Army . Salk it, ae 
Operations up to this date......... 
Measures for evacuation of Syria .. 
Syrian Conscripts in ce Army 
Excesses of Albanians. . 
Respecting negotiations ‘between 
France’ and the other Powers on 
Turco-Egyptian Question 


cere coer esos 


eo eee eee 


ee cece ee eo ee re 


oe ee oe 


Drafts of Protocol B and Convention 


183 


194 


207 


225 


230 
232 


232 
235 
235 
237 
237 
239 


241 
255 


263 
265 


308 
308 
310 
314 


317 
317 


320 


321 


CORRESPONDENCE 


RELATIVE TO 


THE AFFAIRS OF THE LEVANT. 


PART III. 


No. l. 


Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 4.) 


(Extract.) Paris, November 2, 1840. 


BARON NEUMANN has probably put your Lordship in possession 
of the contents of the despatches which my Austrian Colleague received 
from Prince Metternich on Friday last, and of which he has been instructed 
to communicate some parts to the French Government. 

Count Appony made this communication to M. Guizot yesterday, who 
expressed satisfaction with the pacific tenour of the communication, which 
he considered as implying the hope that France would be party to an 
arrangement of the Affairs of the East. He, however, regretted to find 
that there was no specific proposition which would enable the French 
Government to state to the Chambers that negotiations were on foot 
between France and the Powers who had signed the Treaty of July. 


- No. Dap 


Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston.— (Received November 7.) 


My Lord, Paris, November 5, 184.0. 
I RECEIVED, late last night, by the messenger, your Lordship’s 
despatch of the 2nd instant*, and I this morning, at eight o’clock, 
transmitted to M. Guizot a copy of it. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) GRANVILLE. 


No. 3. 


Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 8.) 


My Lord, Paris, November 6, 1840. 


M. GUIZOT this morning read to me a despatch which he had addressed 
to Baron Bourqueney on Wednesday last, with the view of opening the 
way to an understanding between France and the Powers who are parties 
to the Treaty of July, on the settlement of the Eastern Question. 

The French Chargé d’ Affaires having received instructions to commu- 
nicate to you this despatch, it is unnecessary for me to state its contents, 


* See Part II., page 338. 
B, 


2 


but I have to report to your Lordship the substance of a conversation 
which ensued between the French Minister and me on the same subject. 

M. Guizot mentioned to me that the Baron Bulow, since his return 
to London from Berlin, in talking with M. Bourqueney respecting the 
expediency of France being party to a pacific arrangement between the 
Sultan and Mehemet Ali, had suggested that an agreement should be 
entered into for the suspension of hostilities on a certain day, and that the 
question whether the Pashalic of Acre be conceded by the Treaty of 
Peace to the Pasha of Egypt, should depend upon the Fortress of Acre 
being actually in possession of the Egyptians or of the Turks at the 
period of the suspension of hostilities. M. Guizot said that the French 
Government had this objection to Baron Bulow’s suggestion, that France 
by the adoption of it would adhere to an arrangement more disadvan- 
tageous to Mehemet Ali than the Treaty of July, inasmuch as by that 
agreement, the Pasha would be bound to give up, not only all that he was 
called upon to surrender by that Treaty, but possibly the Pashalic of 
Acre in addition. The proposition would be fairer, and one to which the 
French Government might agree, if the basis of the negotiation for peace 
should be the state of actual possession in the whole of Syria, by the 
contending parties, on a certain day to be fixed for the suspension of 
hostilities; that is, if Aleppo and Damascus, and the Oriental part of 
Syria, were still occupied by the Egyptians, the abandonment of it should 
be compensated by giving to the Pasha an equivalent elsewhere. I 
observed to M. Guizot, that the Pasha of Egypt had been forewarned by 
the Articles of the Treaty itself, of the consequences of his compelling the 
Sultan and his Allies to have recourse to measures of coercion; and that, 
after the call that had been made upon the Syrians to throw off the 
Egyptian yoke, the Sultan was bound in honour to the people who had 
risen in support of his rights, not to abandon them to the mercy of 
Mehemet Ali; that if the Pashalic of Acre were restored to its legitimate 
Sovereign by the efforts of its inhabitants, aided and encouraged by the 
Turks and their Allies, the Allied Powers could not advise the Sultan to 
place them again under the Egyptian dominion. M. Guizot admitted that 
the Sultan might reasonably refuse to abandon the Syrians, who had 
raised the Turkish standard, and re-established the authority of the 
Porte, but he suggested that some compensation might be found for 
Mehemet Ali by leaving Candia under his Government. 

Unless some compensation of this sort be made by the Allies, France 
cannot concur in any pacific arrangement between thé Sultan and the 
Viceroy, or exert her influence to induce the latter to accept the conditions 
of peace imposed upon him; “ and is it worth while,” said M. Guizot, 
“for the sake of excluding the Pasha of Egypt from the Government of 
Candia during the few years of life that now remain to him, to risk the 
dangerous consequences that may result to all the world, from France not 
concurring in the settlement of the peace in the East; for it cannot be 
doubted, that the want of such concurrence will render precarious such 
settlement, as well as expose to hazard the peace of the West of Europe.’ 

M. Guizot assured me, that the French Government had no other 
intelligence respecting the military events in the Levant, than that which 
had been published in the ministerial journals last night, and copied into 
all the newspapers of this morning. That this intelligence was most 
unfavourable to the Pasha could not be denied, but it did not appear to 
him to be at all conclusive as to Ibrahim Pasha being unable to maintain 
possession of the plains to the eastward of the mountains, or as to his being 
under the necessity of evacuating the towns of Aleppo and Damascus, or 
the passes of the Taurus. wee 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) GRANVILLE. 


3 


No. 4. 


Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received November 11.) 


(Extract.) Paris, November 9, 1840. 


THE proposition made by M. Guizot, in his despatch to the Baron 
de Bourqueney of Wednesday last, was not one to which the French 
Government, | believe, had the hope of obtaining the assent of your 
Lordship, or of the Representatives of the other Powers. They could not 
expect, that after the success which has attended the operations of the 
Turks and their Allies on the coast of Syria, and at a moment when 
intelligence is daily expected of the fall of St. Jean d’Acre, the Allies 
could advise the Sultan to accord to Mehemet Ali more favourable 
conditions of peace than those offered to him by the Treaty of July, and 
before the inability of the Egyptian Army to maintain possession of the 
most important points in Syria had been so clearly manifested ; but the 
proposition which was made by M. Guizot in conversation with me on 
Friday, and respecting which he told me yesterday he had since written 
to the Baron Bourqueney, they flatter themselves may be more favourably 
listened to. Many Deputies, the friends of peace and good order, to 
whom it is indifferent whether St. Jean d’Acre be in the hands of the 
Sultan or of the Pasha of Egypt, have a feeling that the dignity and 
honour of France will suffer, if the Allies reject the overtures of the 
French Government to come to an understanding with the Allies as to the 
future existence of Mehemet Ali, and will be satisfied if the Ministers 
shall be able to show by the subsequent conduct of the Allies, that the 
regret which they have all expressed that France was not a party to the 
Alliance, was perfectly sincere. 


No. 5. 


Viscount Palmerston to Earl Granville. 


(Extract.) Foreign Office, November 12, 1840. 


WITH reference to your despatch of the 6th instant, I have to 
state to your Excellency, that M. de Bourqueney, to whom I showed that 
despatch, assures me that M. Guizot did not address to him any despatch 
on Wednesday, the 4th instant, but only wrote to him on that day a 
private letter, a part of which M. de Bourqueney read me last Saturday 
morning. I said to M. de Bourqueney, that Her Majesty’s Government is 
most desirous that France should join the Quintuple Alliance, but that I 
should only be deceiving M. Guizot, if I were to lead him to suppose that 
Her Majesty’s Government could agree to anything beyond the Treaty ; 
that the Treaty, having been concluded, must be executed; and I 
reminded him, that by the Treaty Mehemet Ali has lost all right to any 
part of Syria, and even to Egypt itself; though, with respect to the latter 
province, it is the opinion of Her Majesty’s Government, that the Sultan 
would do well to reinstate him, if he should submit completely, and at an 
early moment. I said, moreover, that our successes in Syria have been so 
rapid and signal that we may assume, that the Sultan’s authority is 
virtually re-established over the whole of that province; and that the 
discontent of the Egyptians is represented as being so great, that it is by 
no means impossible that the authority of Mehemet Ali in Egypt may be 
overthrown by the people themselves. e 

As it does not appear, from your Excellency’s report of your 
conversation with M. Guizot on the 6th instant, that M. Guizot requested 
you to make any proposition to Her Majesty’s Government, it is not 
necessary for me to give your Excellency any instructions to make to M. 
Guizot any other reply than that which you made at the time, to what fell 
from him. But as to the notion that Her Majesty’s Government could, 
out of deference to the wishes of France, suspend operations which 

B 2 


4 


Great Britain is carrying on upon the coast of Syria in fulfilment of the 


engagements of a Treaty concluded with Four other Powers, you acted 
very properly in giving no encouragement whatever to such a suggestion. 

M. Guizot seems, indeed, in the whole of the conversation to have 
gone upon the assumption, that the Treaty of July last is not to be 
executed, and that the only thing to be considered is, what mode of 
breaking that Treaty would be the least disagreeable to the Contracting 
Parties. But the Allies intend that the Treaty shall be carried into execu- 
tion; and, therefore, it seems useless to discuss the relative merits of the 
various ways of setting it aside. 

No doubt the Five Powers who are parties to the Treaty of July, 
would gladly have the accession of France to that Treaty ; and Her 
Majesty’s Government are persuaded, that if France were willing to accede 
to it, and thus to become a party to the settlement of the peace in the 
Levant, all the Contracting Parties would joyfully accept her accession. 
But it is not at first sight evident what the dangerous consequences are, 
which, M. Guizot says, may result to the world, from France not concur- 
ring in, that is to say, not being a co-operating party to, this settle- 
ment; nor is it manifest in what way the want of the concurrence of 
France will render the settlement precarious, and expose to hazard the 
peace of the West of Europe. France might indeed be tempted, though it 
is scarcely supposable she should be so, to interpose, while affairs are 
still pending ; and to endeavour, by force of arms, to prevent a settlement 
distasteful to her, and calculated to defeat her unavowed designs; but, 
when once that settlement has been effected, and the authority of the 
Sultan has been re-established in his own dominions, France cannot hope 
to reverse such an arrangement, even if she were to take up arms to 
endeavour to do so, which it is quite impossible to suppose she would. 
For, even if she had strength sufficient to make the attempt, her recorded 
pledges to the Sultan must prevent her from doing so, as long as her 
Government continues to attach any value to a character for good 
faith. 

The anxiety of Her Majesty’s Government to obtain the co-operation 
of France arose not from any feeling that such co-operation was indispen- 
sably necessary to give permanent stability to the arrangement when 
effected, but chiefly because such co-operation would have ensured the 
prompt submission of Mehemet Ali, and would therefore have led to a more 
easy and speedy accomplishment of the object in view. 


No. 6. 


Viscount Palmerston to Earl Granville. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, November 13, 1840. 


WITH reference to your Excellency’s despatch of the 9th instant, 
I have to state to your Excellency, that, as I have already informed you 
by my despatch of yesterday, M. de Bourqueney denies having received 
any despatch from M. Guizot, such as your Excellency states M. Guizot 
to have read to you on the 6th instant; and I have not as yet received 
any official proposition or communication from M. Guizot through M. de 
Bourqueney. . 

With respect to the feelings which your Excellency states to be 
entertained by some of the Deputies, that the Four Powers, in order to 
prove the sincerity of their regret that France is not a party to the 
Alliance, ought to consent to abstain from carrying the Treaty into execu- 
tion, I have to observe, that such reasoning is unsound, and rests upon an 
erroneous foundation. The Four Powers have invariably, and with the 
utmost sincerity, expressed their regret that France is not a party to the 
Treaty which they have concluded with the Porte; but they have never 
expressed regret at having concluded that Treaty; nor have they ever 
stated, that, because France did not choose to be a party to the arrange- 
ment which that Treaty is to effect, they would on that account abstain 


1 Nea OR 
PV SON ee Dae 


5 


from effecting that arrangement. If such had been the feeling of the Four 
Powers, and if they had been of opinion, that no arrangement of the 
Turkish Question could be carried into effect, but such an one as France 
would be a party to, they ought not to have concluded the Treaty of J uly, 
nor to have taken towards each other, and towards the Sultan, the 
engagements which that Treaty contains. 

‘The Four Powers have, from the beginning, felt great regret that the 
determination of France not to join in any coercive measures against 
Mehemet Ali, rendered it impossible for France to be a party to the 
Treaty ; but it would be very much to mistake the nature of their regret, 
to suppose that it implies a willingness to allow France to have a voice 
whether a Treaty, to which she is not a party, shall be executed or not. 
I apprehend that nothing but the overwhelming force of any Power could 
entitle it to prescribe to other Powers to refrain from executing the 
engagements of a ‘Treaty; and there is no Power now existing in Europe 
strong enough to impose its own will in such a manner upon other 
States. 

Tam, &c. 


(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 7. 
Lord William Russell to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received October 30.) 


My Lord, Berlin, October 26, 1840. 


I COMMUNICATED to Baron Werther the despatch* of the 15th 
instant, addressed by your Lordship to Her Majesty’s Ambassador at 
Constantinople, and his Excellency desired me to say that the instructions 
contained therein had his entire approbation. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) WILLIAM RUSSELL. 


No. 8. 
Mr. Consul Larking to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewved November 2.) 


My Lord, Alexandria, October 6, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to acquaint your Lordship. that on the 26th 
ultimo, Colonel Galisse, a French officer of Engineers, arrived here by a 
Government steamer from Toulon; he immediately inspected all the 
fortifications in the city and along the coast, and is now preparing plans 
for a comprehensive scheme of defence, including the erection of batteries 
at Aboukir, and at the new or eastern harbour, as well as the refortifi- 
cation of the heights which formed the French lines during the invasion 
of 1801. 

Great discontent prevails amongst the Turks on board the fleet, in 
consequence of the substitution of Arab for Turkish officers; this dis- 
satisfaction often borders on mutiny, and a report is current that it ig 
in agitation to send them to garrison the city of Cairo. 

M. de Weimar, said to be the newly-appointed French Consul- 
General for Bagdad, has arrived here on his way to that city, and has had 
repeated conferences with Mehemet Ali. | 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) JOHN W. LARKING 


See Part II., page 311. 


No. 9. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewed November (te 


My Lord, Therapia, October 19, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to inclose despatches I received yesterday from 
Syria, brought by Colonel Hodges. . 

I beg to call your attention to Mr. Wood’s despatches. In the 
despatch from General Jochmus will be found most satisfactory proof of 
the sagacity with which Commodore Napier adapts his measures to the 
circumstances under which he acts, and the felicitous audacity with which 
he carries them into execution. 

What has been done in Syria by Commodore Napier, by General 
Jochmus, and by Captain Walker, and the brave men under their com- 
mand, has destroyed the spell of Mehemet Ali’s fortune, and shows that 
Ibrahim’s boasted skill and valour are nothing when met by such men as 
those above named. The Turkish soldiers, heretofore cowed by defeats, 
due to the ignorance of their Generals, are now said to be elated with a 
just confidence in themselves under able commanders, and have shown that 
valour for which their nation has been formerly so highly celebrated. 

It will not be the fault of the soldiers hereafter, if Syria and Egypt 
be not restored to the possession of their legitimate Sovereign. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 9. 


Mr. Wood to Viscount Ponsonby. 


Ottoman flag-ship, off Djoune, 
(Extract.) October 8, 1840. 

I HAVE distinctly stated to Izzet Pasha that, previous to his arrival, I 
had declared to the Syrians, by your Lordship’s authority, that the Porte 
would grant them their ancient rights and privileges if they returned to 
their allegiance to the Sultan; and as I knew it was in consequence of 
such promises they were encouraged to the degree of again revolting 
against the Egyptian Authorities only a few weeks after they had laid 
down their arms, I sincerely trusted and fully expected his Excellency 
would now, by virtue of his authority in Syria, execute all I had promised 
in the name of your Excellency. 

Izzet Pasha answered that he would, but in a tone that did not satisfy 
me that he would. Since then I have spoken to him again on the subject, 
and argued with him on the prudence of abolishing a number of taxes 
which arealtogether illegal, and are even unknown in other parts of the 
Turkish Empire. These taxes and imposts will have to be abolished so 
soon as the Sultan’s authority is established throughout the country, being 
contrary to the Hatti Sheriff; and were they to be abolished at once it 
would create a most favourable moral effect in the country, and would 
undoubtedly encourage the nation to redouble their exertions in support 
of their Sovereign. Besides which, Ibrahim Pasha is making similar 
concessions to the Syrians, and it becomes therefore doubly incumbent on 
the Porte not to delay the execution of a measure that promises so much 
present good. 

I have alluded to the same subject in my letter of the 3rd instant to 
Izzet Pasha; but he replied to me verbally that he preferred waiting for 
instructions from the Porte relative to the principles on which he was to 
govern Syria, before he took any responsibility upon himself. Neverthe- 
less, I cannot help thinking that we are giving Ibrahim Pasha an advan- 
tage over us by his hesitation in a matter that requires none. 

_I have also suggested to his Excellency that the discharge of the 
Syrian conscripts who are our prisoners would greatly promote the cause 
of the Sultan. There are no less than 16,000 of them in the Egyptian 


7 
Army, who, when liberated, would fight for him so long as their future 
liberty depended on the success of his arms. 

I have reason to believe that though in many instances his Excellency 
pretends to concur with me in opinion on these subjects, yet he takes no 
trouble to follow out my suggestions the moment I leave him. I have 
been also endeavouring to persuade him to use the greatest courtesy to- 
wards the Princes and the Sheiks in his camp, without exception, and not 
to make any distinctions, by which he will lay the seeds of jealousy amongst 
them, and will make them attend more to their private feuds than to the 
public service. 

In order that my representations may have some weight with him, 1 
have given him explicitly to understand that I was sent here by your 
Lordship, that I was authorised to make a number of promises to the 
Syrians, (the nature of which I specified,) and that I was in. a manner 
pledged to see them executed by the Sultan’s officers. 

I trust your Lordship will not be led to infer from the foregoing that 
any difference exists between us; on the contrary, we are on the most 
cordial terms together, and in many instances he is pleased to consult me 
and abide by my advice; but as the executive rests with him, it does not 
always depend upon me to make him follow up his good intentions. He 
is, however, full of energy and zeal; though I may be permitted to say, 
that I do not consider him the fittest person to govern these countries after 
the termination of the war. 

Since writing the above, I have received the Grand Vizier’s very 
handsome letter conveying the Porte’s authority for me to act in Syria. 
I feel confident that so soon as the Pasha sees it, he will pay more atten- 
tion to my suggestions. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 9. 


Mr. Wood to Viscount Ponsonby. 


- Ottoman flag-ship, off Djoume, 
(Extract.) October 10, 1840. 

ON the 20th of September I embarked on board the steamer 
“Cyclops,” to reconnoitre the coast from Beyrout to Sidon, and to com- 
municate with the inhabitants of that part of Mount Lebanon which 
descends to the sea, to agree on the manner of arming them. At Sidon I 
found the Egyptians busy in fortifying and barricading the town and 
streets. The result of my observations I have communicated to the 
Admiral, and his Excellency having decided upon an attack on Sidon, I 
was received on board Her Majesty’s ship “ Thunderer,” on the 24th, and 

roceeded off Sidon, taking up our position close to the castle and town. 
On the 26th, Commodore Napier joined us with a few Turkish troops 
. and marines, in all not exceeding 1,400. The town was then duly sum- 
moned; and on the refusal of the Authorities to give it up, it was bom- 
barded, and a landing was effected. In four hours and a half it was taken 
by assault, and the whole garrison, composed of nearly 3,000 Egyptians, 
including the officers, were taken prisoners. We did not lose altogether 
more than five men, and had only thirty-two wounded. The whole action 
was a most gallant one, and not sufficient praise can be bestowed on the 
officers who conducted the assault, particularly on Admiral Walker, who 
headed the Turkish troops, and who, after taking possession of the castle, 
was the first to rush into the town, with a handful of Turks, and drive 
back the enemy from their barricades. 

While I congratulate your Lordship on the success of the Turkish 
arms, as the chief promoter and supporter of the Expedition, I may be 
allowed to pay a passing tribute to the justness of the opinion your Lord- 
ship formed of the worthlessness of the Egyptian troops and of the power 
of Mehemet Ali, which is at best but little more than nominal in Syria. 

The capture of Sidon has produced a great sensation in the country ; 
it has considerably lowered the Egyptians in the estimation of the natives ; 
and has shown that they are inferior to the troops brought against them. 


8 


On the tollowing day, I had the Divan of Sidon, composed of natives, 
assembled, and read to them a copy of the firman bearing Izzet Pasha’s 
nomination, with which he had furnished me, his own Boyourouldi, 
and an Arabic version of the Convention ; after which I proceeded to the 
nomination of a Governor, in the name of his Excellency. All the other 
public officers were confirmed in their places, and were charged to send in 
returns of all the public stores of every nature, particularly in arms and 
ammunition. Every thing was done in the name of the Sultan. Public 
prayers were offered by the Mufti for the success of his arms; and the 
greatest enthusiasm was displayed by all classes of His Highness’s sub- 
jects, to whom I distinctly stated that henceforth they should be governed 
according to the Hatti Sheriff, and all illegal taxes and imposts should be 
abolished. 

I beg to inclose a copy of the letter the Divan addressed to Izzet 
Pasha, and a copy of the one I wrote to his Excellency. I am glad in 
being able to state that his Excellency has confirmed the Governor, at 
Captain Berkeley’s and my request; and I sincerely trust he will also take 
my suggestions into consideration. 

My proposal to the Admiral to arm the inhabitants of Damour, (a 
district nine miles to the north of Sidon, and within four hours’ march of 
Deir-el-Kammar, the capital of the mountains, and of the residence of the 
Emir Bechir,) had for object, first, the harassing of Solyman Pasha’s left 
flank ; secondly, the cutting off of his retreat on his rear, over the moun- 
tains,—Djounie and Sidon being in our possession ; and, thirdly, the offer- 
ing of facilities to the great Prince to come to us, or of forcing him into 
submission. In consequence, on the 29th, Captain Berkeley and myself, 
with about’a hundred marines, proceeded on board the steamer “ Strom- 
boli,” and disembarked at the River Damour, from whence [I ad- 
dressed immediately a circular letter to the Princes and Sheiks, 
as noted per margin®*, of the surrounding villages, who came down 
and were armed accordingly. The four Princes accompanied me to 
Djounie to pay personally their respects to the Pasha, who presented each 
with a sword, and gave them their Boyourouldis as sub-governors of their 
several districts. ‘The Princes, who are related to the great Prince, were 
highly gratified, and have been sent back with an order to receive 1,000 
muskets more to guard the passage to Deir-el-Kammar, and prevent all 
communication between Ibrahim Pasha, who is actually at the latter place, 
and Solyman Pasha, encamped with a very few troops and sixteen field- 
pieces at a place called Merge, a league beyond Beyrout. 

I addressed a letter also from thence to the Sheik of Deir-el-Kammar, 
Yautish-el-Hadid. The Sheik came personally to Sidon to offer his 
and his people’s submission; but stated that, as Ibrahim Pasha was 
there with about 4,000 men, it was impossible for the inhabitants 
to leave their families and come for arms, as the moment it became 
known to him, he would revenge himself on their families, and burn their 
homes in their absence. He proposed, however, that the armed moun- 
taineers in the neighbourhood should march in a body to Deir-el-Kammar, 
supported by a body of our troops, having arms for distribution, when the 
inhabitants would meet and assist us in driving the Egyptians out of it. 
The Honourable Captain Berkeley and myself were contemplating such 
an expedition, when intelligence that Ibrahim Pasha had brought together 
4,000 troops, made us relinquish our intention for the moment, being too 
weak to attempt it alone. 

Once Deir-el-Kammar taken, the whole of the mountains of Lebanon 
are ours, and [brahim Pasha must either shut himself up in Acre or must 
retreat beyond them ; leaving to our undisputed possession both the moun- 
tains and the sea-coast ; for the nature of the country is such, that it would 
be impossible for him to remain near the coast, if we are in possession of 
the whole range of Mount Lebanon. The mountains descend nearly to 
the sea, which would place his army, on many points, within range of the 
guns of our ships, and in all others, between us and the armed peasantry. 


* Emir Jousuf, Emir Melham, Emir Abdallah, Emir Ismaél ; Sheiks,—Janus Murad, Lahoud 
Asaf, Auton Hauna, Abou Mansour, Nadir, Laloum, Laloum Nadir, ; pam 2-4 


f 


Your Lordship will excuse the mention of the above details, which I 
only give with the view to show how limited is now the country left for 
Ibrahim Pasha to act in. He is surrounded with difficulties ; there is no 
option left him, and he must either shut himself up in Acre, leavin 
Syria to us, or he must retreat beyond Lebanon, which I think he will do 
in preference to the former alternative. : 

The country to the south of Sidon, as far as Acre, is inhabited by 
Mutualis, who are in favour of the Sultan. While at. Sidon, I sent 
them a letter, calling upon them to take arms in defence of their dis- 
regarded rights and privileges. In their answer, they express their 
entire devotedness to the Porte, and their willingness to tender personally 
their submission. ‘They, moreover, sent a confidential agent to inform me 
that [brahim Pasha had demanded 2,000 of their clients to co-operate 
with his army against us, but that they had refused to comply with his 
demand and begged to be furnished forthwith with 3,000 stand of arms, 
both to defend themselves, and to take possession of the Pass of Ras 
Nakhora, and the country beyond it. This pass secured, all commu- 
nication between Acre and Ibrahim Pasha will be cut off. Besides 
which, no troops can be brought from the latter place, either to T'sour 
or Sidon, to attack us. Notwithstanding I was called away from Sidon 
the day three of the Sheiks came to take away the arms, Captain Berke- 
ley undertook to give them, with the necessary quantity of ammuni- 
tion, assisted by the British Agent there. On my part, I have asked 
and have obtained from the Pasha a Boyourouldi for each Sheik, 
confirming them in their several posts, with the condition that they use all 
their efforts in the support of their legitimate Sovereign against Mehemet 
Ali. } 

On the 20th instant Kaiffa was taken by a squadron of one Turkish 
and two English frigates. They took off two mortars, four field-pieces, a 
quantity of arms and ammunition, and destroyed the rest before they 
abandoned the town. 

The same squadron captured Tsour on the 24th, where a great 
quantity of grain and public stores Were found. The garrison, about 
1,200 men, retreated at night a league inland, where they continue to 
remain encamped. 

On the 29th, Selim Pasha and a body of marines marched against the 
enemy’s outposts on the heights of the Dog River (Nahr el Kelb) and 
drove them back ; and on the 4th instant the Emir Bechir (El-Kasim) our 
friend, who joined us on the 30th, attacked, with about 1,000 mountaineers, 
Osman Pasha’s division of the army, (amounting, as the Emir told me, to 
5,000 men,) over which he obtained a signal victory, after a combat of six 
hours, killmg and wounding above 300 of the enemy, and taking 600 
prisoners and deserters. Osman Pasha estimates his total loss at 2,000 
men, from which it would appear that many of his troops dispersed. He 
was himself wounded by a musket-shot, and has fled to Zahlé, a large 
Maronite village on the other side of Lebanon, bordering on the plains of 
the Bakaa. . 

The inhabitants of Tripoli, with the mountaineers of Beshiary and 
Emir Hangiar of Balbec, have themselves proposed to drive the garrison 
out of the town of Tripoli, if the Pasha gave them arms, to which his 
Excellency has acceded. A British squadron will co-operate with them. 
The Expedition is well combined, and leaves little doubt of its success. 
The people of Tripoli have too many wrongs to redress to remain quiet 
spectators of what is going forward in Syria, without making an effort to 
free themselves from the yoke of the Egyptians. ; 

Similar measures are in operation in regard to Lattachia. Natives 
have been appointed to both places as governors. ‘There are great 
quantities of public stores, arms, and ammunition in these two towns, and 
their capture will greatly distress the Egyptian army at Marash and 
Aleppo. ! 

Prati Pasha is actually at Ibteddein, or Deir-el-Kammar, with 
about 1,500 men, undecided how to act. At one moment he proposes 
encamping near Sidon, and hazarding an attempt at retaking it; at 
another, of collecting together all his forces, and attacking us. He 


10 


entertains, also, an idea of throwing himself into Acre, or of retreating to 
the Valley of the Orontes. In fact, my Lord, he is quite perplexed how to 
act; he is now convinced the whole country is decidedly opposed to him, 
and he is aware that were he to throw himself into Acre, Syria is lost to 
him, and were he to retire into the interior, he must leave us in possession 
of the whole coast and of the mountains. 

The natives tell me positively that the feeling is such at Acre, that it 
would surrender to any squadron that bombarded it for half an hour. 
The troops composing the garrison are, for the most part, disaffected ; and 
I am even assured that, not long since, the Governor was obliged to take 
the arms out of the hands of the artillery to prevent mischief. The men 
in the gallies are waiting with anxiety for the moment to fall on their 
jailors to obtain their liberation. 


The number of prisoners taken since the 10th of September 


amounts to - - - - ~ 2,924 
Deserters - - - - - - 41,927 
Total - - 4,851 


900 of whom are in the pay, and serving under the standard, of the 
Sultan. The Syrians continue to manifest the most enthusiastic feeling in 
favour of the Sultan. Already 20,000 stand of arms have been distributed, 
and still thousands come daily to ask for more, which we cannot give 
them until the arrival of the “Cambridge.” In conclusion, I have the 
satisfaction of assuring your Lordship that the cause of the Sultan is 
Ripe beyond our most sanguine expectations. His Highness’ arms 

ave been successful everywhere, supported throughout by the natives, 
who repair with confidence to his standard, as their only safeguard against 
misrule and oppression. 


Inclosure 3 in No. 9. 
Mr. Wood to Viscount Ponsonby. 


Ottoman flag-ship, off Djounie, 
(Extract.) October 12,1840. 

THE disinclination of the Emir Bechir to join the Sultan’s standard 
obliged me to grant him a term, not to injure further the interests of the 
Sultan in Syria, by permitting him to use his authority to our prejudice. 
On its expiration, I delivered on the 8th instant the firman superseding 
him, to Emir Bechir-el-Kasim, who has evinced, in many instances, his 
attachment and loyalty to the Sultan, and who has rendered himself 
worthy of his appointment by his two successive defeats of the enemy. 

The Ex-Emir has since put himself in communication with me, and 
has made known his intention of throwing himself on the clemency of his 
Imperial Master the Sultan. He is coming to the river Damour to-day, 
with his family, where I shall repair immediately on board a steamer to 
receive him. 

By the very next opportunity, I shall do myself the honour of trans- 
mitting to your Lordship my correspondence with him, with a statement 
of the whole transaction. 

Karly on the morning of the 10th instant, Beyrout was evacuated by 
the Egyptians, the Imperial standard was hoisted, and the town garrisoned 
by the Sultan’s troops, who are occupied in throwing up works to repel 
any future attack. 

That nothing may be wanting to crown our undertakings with success 
a general action was also fought yesterday (10th instant), between the 
Sultan’s troops and the Egyptians on the heights, about four hours from 
our positions. The former were commanded by Commodore Napier and 
Selim Pasha, the latter by Ibrahim Pasha and Hassan Pasha (Bey). 
The Egyptians were totally defeated, and Ibrahim Pasha. only escaped 
with seven men; the rest were dispersed, and 700 of them became our 
prisoners. 


ll 


Mehemet Ali’s power in this part of Syria is overthrown, and I con- 
ceive it to be impossible for him ever to regain his ground here, now that 
the mountains are ours and Emir Bechir is secured. 

Solyman Pasha, who was encamped near Beyrout, was obliged to 
abandon his position, leaving behind him nineteen pieces of ordnance, 
ammunition, and stores. He fled with only 500 men ; the rest, amounting 
to 2,000, made their submission yesterday before the town of Beyrout. It 
is reported that 900 men are coming to follow their example. The 
number of deserters and prisoners amount, therefore, to 8,000 and 
upwards, which exceed our own numbers. 

Beyrout, Sidon, and Tsour, are garrisoned by the Sultan’s troops ; 
Djebail and Batroun by natives. 


Inclosure 4 in No. 9. 


General Jochmus to Viscount Ponsonby. 


‘(Extract.) Camp of Djounme, October 7, 1840. 


HIS Highness. Izzet Pasha communicated to me an official letter 
which he received from Constantinople, announcing to him that the 
Sublime Porte had appointed me a General of Division. 

I hope in the course of this war to prove that this appointment 
has not been entirely useless; it will be the best mode of expressing my 
sincere thanks. 

Selim Pasha, also a Ferik, or General of Division, will now command 
all the troops here, Izzet Pasha having declared that he will only 
occupy himself with his affairs of Governor-General. Our difficulties are 
diminishing, and if Commodore Napier is allowed to go on as he began, 
you may expect good news from this quarter, the more so, as by the 
arrival of Captain Ford we received a new reinforcement of a battalion, 
and the news of another brigade coming immediately,‘and more troops 
later. 

We can expect thus to see here soon from 15,000 to 18,000 men, and 
with that force, if they are tolerable troops, we may hope to do something 
decisive. 

There are no Turkish nor English arms left for distribution ; 20,000 
have been given out. 

If you send us down 10,000 stand more, they will immediately be 
disposed of. © 


Inclosure 5 in No. 9. 
General Jochmus to Viscount Ponsonby. 


Head Quarters, Beyrout, 
My Lord, October 12, 1840, 6 a.m. 


I HAD the honour to inform your Lordship of the causes and the 
event of the dispersion of Osman Pasha’s corps. 

Ibrahim Pasha having continued since, and notwithstanding the 
reverse, his system of dividing his forces, in order to cover more ground 
against the projected armaments of the mountaineers, we have persisted, 
on our side, to take advantage of his mistakes. 

On the 8th of October, in the afternoon, I occupied the heights of 
Ardali (where the action of the 24th of September had been fought), and 
the village of Ornachajuen, without opposition, with a force of four 
battalions. 

During the following night, about 300 armed peasants joined, and I 
made early on the 9th a reconnaissance on my left, to ascertain the nature 
of the ground. A skirmish ensued, and the enemy showed about 1,500 
men, under Hassan Bey and Emir Massoud, on the opposite heights of 
Calat Meidan. 

Commodore Napier and Selim Pasha coming to the heights of Ardali 

C2 


« ESI) Nt rea oe » 
ete Mn YY 


12 


on the 9th, resolved to drive the enemy from his position, in order to 
facilitate the operations of Emir Bechir Kasim, who, having been pro- 
claimed governing Prince in lieu of the old Emir Bechir, had been directed 
to cross the Kelb Sou, and to enter the provinces above Beyrout, for which 
purpose he had collected a force of mountaineers, and had been provided 
with 1,100 muskets for distribution, the last remaining. 

The ultimate object of the operation was eventually the taking of 
Beyrout, whither Admiral Stopford had gone with part of the squadron. 

’ The position of the enemy at Calat Meidan, however, was of pro- 
digious natural strength, being covered by a deep ravine, and presenting 
three successive lines of entrenchments, the elevation of the position, from 
the depth of the ravine to the highest redoubt, being perhaps 1,000 yards, 
and in many parts the rocks were nearly perpendicular. 

Commodore Napier, with the double view of saving a great loss of 
life on our part, and of obtaining a greater result in victory, directed me 
to order Omer Bey, who with five battalions had been left in our position 
above Djounie, to march with two of them to Ageltun, there to cross the 
Kelb Sou, and to fall on the enemy in his flank and rear. The Emir 
Bechir received similar orders. 

Shortly afterwards, and during the evening of the 9th, we ascertained 
that Ibrahim Pasha in person had arrived at Calat Meidan, with 2,000 of 
his best troops, namely, 1,200 Albanian body-guards, and 800 of what is 
called his regular guard. 

Perceiving finally his fault, this General had ordered four battalions 
of Solyman Pasha to join him also, and 2,000 more men were approaching 
from Zachlé, in order to be concentrated in our front. 

Not a moment was to be lost. 

The Commodore ordered up to the heights of Ardali the three 
remaining battalions from Djounie, and two Turkish field-pieces. 

At two o’clock, on the 10th of October, we had seven battalions at 
Ardali, when the fire of Omer Bey approaching by the road of Beckfuga, 
was distinctly heard in the enemy’s rear. 

The following dispositions were then taken for an immediate attack. 

One battalion and the mountaineers were directed to cross the ravine, 
which separated us from the enemy, and to arrive on his line of retreat 
by the road to Brumana. 

Four battalions stormed the heights of Calat Meidan, two en tirailleurs, 
supported by two others, in closer order, moving by the road. 

' ‘Two battalions, reserves on the heights of Ardali. . 

After two hours’ fighting and the display of the most daring gal- 
lantry on the part of the Turks, for the élite troops of the hitherto 
unvanquished Ibrahim Pasha also stood manfully to their posts strongly 
fortified and facing both attacks, we joined Omer Bey on the heights of 
Calat Meidan. 

The enemy’s three lines of retreat being occupied by our respective 
corps, namely, the road to Brumana by our column, and the roads to 
Beckfuga and Corneil by Omer Bey, Ibrahim’s forces were thrown into 
the gorge, not twenty-five men of any of his corps remaining together 
at sunset, and he himself escaping with difficulty, accompanied by a few 
horsemen. 

Kight hundred prisoners, all his stores and ammunition, &c. &c. fell 
into our hands ; a great many more troops will disperse to their houses, or 
be pursued by the Emir Bechir Kasim, who arrived at sunset within 
three hours’ distance from the field of battle, and communicated to the 
Commodore, that he was then observing the 2,000 men approaching to 
Ibrahim Pasha’s support from Zachlé. 

In consequence of having been weakened by Ibrahim Pasha’s order, 
by four battalions, Solyman Pasha withdrew altogether from, Beyrout in 
the night of the 9th October, and concentrated in a camp one hour and a 
half east from the town, having the river between himself and the place. 
The town was, consequently, occupied by the English and a battalion of 
Turks on the 10th of October; but the news of the entire defeat of 
Ibrahim Pasha having reached Solyman Pasha’s camp, his forces were 
seized by a panic. He himself, abandoned by his troops, fled in the 


13 


direction of Damascus, with a few squadrons of horse; many of his 
soldiers dispersed, a regiment of 2,000 men laid down their arms early on 
the 11th of October at Beyrout, and gave up his entrenched camp with 
nineteen pieces of artillery, ammunition, stores, &c. &c. 
Our success has been complete. The Turkish troops fought as they 
did in the times of Solyman the Great. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) A. JOCHMUS, 
Lieut.-Gen. 


No. 10. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 7.) 


My Lord, Therapia, October 20, 1840. 

I HAVE the honour to inclose to your Lordship copy of a des- 
patch which I have received from Admiral Sir Robert Stopford. 
I have, &c., 

(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure in No. 10. 
Admiral Stopford to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, ‘* Princess Charlotte,” Djounie Bay, October 7, 1840. 


I MAY congratulate your Lordship on the continuing success of 
the Sultan’s cause: Sidon and Jsour are still in our hands; the former 
already put in a formidable state of defence; and with the recent 
and expected reinforcements to the Turkish troops, I have little doubt 
of our continuing to hold it: but the small number of our disposable 
force prevents us doing more, on many other points, than opening a 
temporary means of arming the country people, who are kept off by 
the Egyptian forces, with the aid of cavalry in any open part of the 
country, from a free communication with the sea-shore, notwithstanding 
which they contrive at great risk to present themselves; and I am 
happy to find that, on many occasions, they have made a brave and 
good use of them. <A body of about 2,000, under Abdul Emir-el-Kasim, 
attacked a corps of 4,000 regular troops under Osman Pasha two days 
ago, and totally dispersed them, taking between 300 and 400 prisoners ; 
besides which a Colonel and fifty-eight deserters left them and joined 
our camp. 

A slight check was suffered at Tortosa, from a party of the enemy 
having been thrown in before daybreak on the morning of the attack, and 
some obstructions which were not foreseen. 

At Beyrout, in consequence of information that a powder magazine 
was mined, the “ Edinburgh” and “ Hastings” sent their boats under 
Commander Worth, with the men who had laid the train and given the 
information ; the train was cut off at the moment it was set fire to, and 
thirty-one barrels of powder taken off. One fine young officer was killed 
and two seamen wounded in this gallant enterprise. 

There is no longer any apprehension of an attack upon our position, 
the enemy disappearing, except at Beyrout and the neighbourhood, where 
Solyman Pasha remains with about 4,000 men; but our accounts are 
always exceedingly vague, and we know their marches and evolutions are 
made expressly to deceive us. 

October 12. I had the honour to receive your Lordship’s letters of 
the 21st September and 3rd instant, by the ‘“ Phoenix,” on the 9th, since 
which very great successes have attended the Sultan’s cause. Before the 
arrival of Sir Charles Smith a plan was concerted for a combined attack 
upon the camp of Solyman Pasha and the town of Beyrout; the shipping 


14° 


moved into position, while a portion of the Turkish troops marched by the 
mountains. This led to the evacuation of the town the same night, which 
was taken possession of by us in the morning; while Commodore Napier, 
who led on the Turkish forces under Selim Pasha, of whom he speaks 
highly, found himself in presence of about 3,000 Egyptian troops in a 
strong position, under Ibrahim Pasha himself; gallantly attacked them, 
with the Turks and mountaineers alone; drove them from post to post; 
and at last put them to flight, taking about 800 prisoners, and leaving 
Selim Pasha in chase of the remainder, who has since returned from the 
pursuit. Meantime the 2,000 Egyptian troops, who had previously occu- 
pied the town, made their escape from Solyman’s camp, and returned as 
deserters to the Sultan’s flag; and very soon after, the camp itself was 
deserted, the guns spiked, and Solyman fled; it is supposed to join 
Ibrahim on the road towards Balbec or Damascus. 

I may well congratulate His Highness the Sultan on this most import- 
ant success; great in itself as affording, with Tyre and Sidon, a strong 
hold in the country, and shelter for the troops, who have now left the rock 
on which they landed, and great in its effects of inspiring confidence 
among the inhabitants of the country, for whom it opens a free commu- 
nication with the forces sent to their assistance. 

The prisoners and deserters in all may be estimated at 10,000 and 
20,000 mountaineers well armed ; but a further supply of muskets is much 
wanted. 

Sir Charles is now in the town making the necessary arrangements, 
and will soon proceed to Sidon and Tsour. ; 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) ROBERT STOPFORD, 
Admiral. 


: 


P.S.—Events crowd upon one another in such rapid succession, that I 
am obliged to acquaint your Lordship by a postscript, the Emir Bechir of 
the mountains is now, J am informed, in Sidon; and I have ordered a 
steamer to bring him and his family to Beyrout. Colonel Hodges, who 
takes this despatch, who was with Commodore Napier in the last gallant 
affair, when Ibrahim was nearly taken prisoner, will give you a full detail 
of the present state of affairs here. I have likewise intrusted the Colonel 
with the Egyptian standard which last waved at Beyrout, for presentation 
to His Highness the Sultan. 


No. 11. 
Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 9.) 


Extract.) Vienna, October 28, 1840. 


PRINCE METTERNICH was on the point of sending orders to the 
Internuncio, to concur with Lord Ponsonby in the course directed by your 
Lordship’s despatch* to that Ambassador of October 15, but the arrival 
this morning of the Smyrna Journals, containing accounts of the advan- 
tages recently obtained in Syria, has determined the Prince to delay 
sending the instruction in question for the present. This does not indicate 
on his part the least repugnance to seeing Mehemet Ali reinstated in the 
Government of Egypt; but considering the rapid progress of events in 
Syria, and the possibility that even Acre may fall, he sees no advantage in 
the Sultan presenting an offer to Mehemet Ali at the very moment when 
that Pasha may possibly be on the point of arriving with a request. He 
wishes to preserve to the Sultan the full advantage of his position, and 
he thinks this the more advisable, as, in case of a refusal on the part of 
Mehemet Ali, the Powers would be embarrassed, while the final result of 
the contest in Syria is still undecided, to know what resolution to take with 
regard to that Pasha, though an offer on their part, followed by a refusal 
on his, would be generally felt to require one. The Prince, therefore, 


* See Part IL. page 311. 


15 


takes upon himself to delay the step, directing the Internuncio to give 
no other reason for the delay than the absence of instructions. Prince 
Metternich undertakes to explain this delay at Paris, and will represent 
that his object has been to give the French Government time to exert 
its influence upon Mehemet Ali, and thereby to save the Pasha from 
further endangering his position by a refusal which, under the circum- 
stances now taking place in Syria, he might hereafter regret; thus offering 
to France the part of deciding the conduct of the Pasha, and thereby 
concluding the affair. 


No, 12. 
Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 9.) 


My Lord, Vienna, October 28, 1840. 


PRINCE METTERNICH informs me that the succours destined for 
Syria will consist of twenty-five scientific officers of different arms, of all 
the English muskets in depdt at Carlstadt, and between 300 and 400 
marines. I learn, from another source, that there are 5,000 English 
muskets at Trieste which have been ordered to be embarked. I have 
represented the necessity of sending ammunition with them, and have 
been assured it will be done. As soon as I can learn the exact number of 
muskets sent, I will acquaint your Lordship with it. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) BEAUVALE. 


No. 13. 
Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 9.) 


My Lord, Vienna, October 28, 1840. 


PRINCE ESTERHAZY will set off immediately for London. The 
main point of his instructions is that Austria will act fully up to the 
Convention of the 15th of July; but that if the case, which by the 
Convention is set aside for the consideration of the Cabinets, should arise, 
viz., that of depriving Mehemet Ali of the Government of Egypt, Austria 
reserves to herself the faculty of entering upon the consideration of it in 
common with the Three Powers her Allies. 

By this your Lordship will understand that she is willing to contribute 
her efforts to procure the evacuation of Syria by the Egyptians, looking 
always in practice to the expediency of keeping the Turks in the first line, 
although aiding them, at the same time, by every species of succour 
which may be needed to make their operations effective. When the 
evacuation of Syria shall be complete, and the question of the conduct to 
be observed towards Mehemet Ali in Egypt shall arise, Austria will be 
guided by the circumstances that shall then exist, not pronouncing herself 
more favourable in the meantime to one solution of the question than to 
another. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) _ BEAUVALE. 


No. 14. 
Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.— (Received November 7.) 


My Lord, Vienna, November 1, 1840. 


I HAVE communicated to Prince Metternich, the substance of Mr. 
Wood’s Report to Lord Ponsonby of October 8, which indicates a reluc- 
tance on the part of Izzet Pasha to confirm the promises made by Mr. Wood 


16 


in the name of the Porte, or to give them effect. Prince Metternich is 
strongly impressed with the necessity of setting this right, and will 
immediately instruct the Internuncio to co-operate with Lord Ponsonby 


for that : 
or that purpose taser 


(Signed) BEAUVALE. 


No. 15. 
Viscount Palmerston to Lord Beauvale. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, November 14, 1840. 

WITH reference to your Excellency’s despatch of the 28th ultimo, 
reporting the reasons which have induced Prince Metternich to delay 
sending to the Internuncio instructions similar to those contained in my 
despatch* of October 15, to Lord Ponsonby, I have to state to your Excel- 
lency that the distinction drawn by Prince Metternich between a renewed 
offer to be made by the Sultan to Mehemet Ali, and a proposal to be made 
by Mehemet Ali to the Sultan, and to be accepted by the latter, seems to 
be just, and to be founded on a correct principle ; and the object for which 
my despatch to Lord Ponsonby was written, appears to be as attainable 
by the course recommended by Prince Metternich, as by that which was 
suggested in my despatch. 

Iam, & 


) C., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 16. 
Viscount Palmerston to Lord Beauvale. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, November 14, 1840. 

YOUR Exceliency’s despatches to the 1st instant, have been received 
and laid before the Queen. 

With reference to your Excellency’s despatch of the 28th ultimo, 
reporting that the Austrian Government are about to despatch to 
the coast of Syria five-and-twenty officers of different arms, a supply of 
arms, and a reinforcement of marines, I have to instruct you to express to 
Prince Metternich the extreme gratification which this information has 
afforded Her Majesty’s Government. 

Iam, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 17. 


Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, November 9, 1840. 


WITH reference to the letter from Mr. Wood to your Excellency of 
the 8th of October, of which a copy is inclosed in your despatch of October 
19, I have to instruct your Excellency to represent immediately to the Porte 
that the interests of the Sultan and the honour of the British Crown 
require that the Pasha sent to govern in any part of Syria should be a 
man who will, actively and in good faith, carry into effect the provisions 
of the Hatti Sheriff of Gulhané, and fulfil the promises made to the 
Syrians in the name of the Sultan by the British Agent, Mr. Wood. 
Whatever may be the merits and good qualities of Izzet Pasha, and Her 
Majesty’s Government do not presume to question them, it is evident that 
he is not a man well qualified for the particular duty which has been 
imposed upon him as Pasha of Syria, and therefore Her Majesty’s Govern- 


* See Part II. page 311. 


V7 


ment most earnestly request the Porte to make some different arrangement 
for Syria, and to send to the Pashalicks of that province Governors better 
fitted, than Izzet Pasha seems to be, to carry into effect the benevolent 
intentions of the Sultan, and not only to gain, but also to retain, the con- 
fidence and good-will of the Syrians. 

Her Majesty’s Ambassador at Vienna informs me that the Internuncio 
will also receive from his Government instructions to the same effect as 
those which are contained in this despatch. 

Iam, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


nO 
No. 18. 


Mr. Bloomfield to Viscount Palmerston.— (Received November 10.) 


My Lord, St. Petersburgh, October 31, 1840. 


I INQUIRED yesterday of Count Nesselrode whether Baron 
Brunnow had informed him of the instructions on the deposition of 
Mehemet Ali conveyed to Her Majesty’s Ambassador at Constantinople 
in your Lordship’s despatch* of October 15, and understanding that he had 
not been made acquainted with the exact contents of this despatch, I read 
it to his Excellency, and left it with him. 

Count Nesselrode has now returned this despatch to me, saying that 
he should send a messenger to Constantinople to-morrow, with instructions 
for M. Titow, in conformity with your Lordship’s despatch to Lord 
Ponsonby. 

L have, &c., 
(Signed) J. A. D. BLOOMFIELD, 


No. 19. 
Mr. Bloomfield to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 10.) 


(Extract.) St. Petersburgh, October 31, 1840. 


LAST week a French messenger brought to M. de Barante copies of 
the despatchest addressed by M. Thiers to M. Guizot on the 3rd and 8th 
Instant, in reply to your Lordship’s despatcht to Mr. Bulwer of the 31st of 
August. 

“The French Ambassador was first made acquainted, through the 
foreign newspapers, with the tenor of these despatches. 

M. de Barante has read them to Count Nesselrode, but was instructed 
not to leave any copy, as M. Guizot had been authorized to make such 
alterations as he might deem advisable. 

Count Nesselrode sent for me yesterday, and requested that 1 would 
inform your Lordship that no part of M. Thiers’ despatch could have the 
effect of shaking the confidence so happily established between our 
Governments; that the Convention of July was the pivot on which our 


relations now turned. 


* Part II. page 311. 
+ Part II. pages 270, 276. 
t Part II. page 102. 


18 


No. 20. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 13.) 


My Lord, Therapia, October 21, 1840. 


I HAVE inclosed, for your Lordship’s information, papers which 
I could not forward by the messenger of yesterday. They contain some 
further information respecting affairs in Syria. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 20. 


Mr. Wood to the Sheik Yautish el Hadid of Deir-el-Kammar. — 


(Translation.) 
Illustrious Sir, Dourour, September 20, 1840. 


AFTER informing ourselves of the state of your health, and acquaint- 
ing ourselves with all that can be pleasing to you, we call your attention 
to the inclosed copy of the Convention, for the accomplishment of which 
the Viziers of the Sublime Porte have landed at Kesrowan, with the vic- 
torious army, and with troops from the Allied Powers, to expel for ever 
the government of Mehemet Ali from this country. In consequence we 
have come to your district, so famous for its loyalty, and have written you 
the present, to request you will join us without delay. By accompanying 
the bearer, he will conduct you to the place where we are; but should you 
not be able to come with all your people and clients, come alone, and leave 
an order to the inhabitants to follow you quickly, in order to receive the 
arms destined for them. They shall be protected both by sea and land. 
We have specified above the object of this letter, and we intend to wait 
for you and your clients coming, &c., &c. 


(Signed) RICHARD WOOD. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 20. 
Mr. Wood to Admiral Stopford. 


Her Majesty's ship ‘* Cyclops,” 
Sir, September 22, 1840. 

CAPTAIN AUSTIN, of Her Majesty’s ship “Cyclops,”? whom I 
accompanied in his tour to Saida, will have reported to you his proceed- 
ings along the coast, and I trust your Excellency will not deem it out of 
place if 1 permit myself a few suggestions, the result of the observations 
I was enabled to make with the assistance of Captain Austin. 

The reports of the messengers which I received while at Djounie, from 
the villages to the south of Beyrout, coincide in every respect with the 
conversations I have since had personally with the villagers who came off 
tous. They assert that they would have joined long since the Sultan’s 
troops at Djounie had it been in their power; but that the watch kept by 
the Egyptians, and the precautionary measures of the Emir Bechir, whose 
troops are quartered in their villages in small parties, prevented them from 
even quitting their homes to follow their daily occupations. Two moun- 
tain chiefs, who were received on board to-day, and a letter that was sent 
off to me, confirm the statement of the mountaineers, who are unanimous 
in favour of the Sultan. 

They propose that 1,000 troops be sent to the river Damour, with 
from 3,000 to 5,000 stand of arms, which they undertake to distribute in 
two days. Their desire to have the co-operation of the troops and the 


19 


assistance of two or three ships of war, arises from the simple fact, that 
their presence will frighten away the guards that are placed over them by 
the Emir Bechir, thereby leaving them free to come for their arms. 

The mountain chiefs on board the “Cyclops,” are known to be 
powerful, and men of influence, who were deeply compromised in the late 
insurrection. One of them posseses five villages, and can arm alone 1,000 
of his own men. The Emir Bechir-el-Kasim, whom the Sultan has ap- 
pointed by his Imperial firman to supersede his uncle the great Prince (also 
Emir Bechir by name,) resides near these villages ; and notwithstanding his 
anxiety to join the Sultan’s troops, he also has been prevented doing so by 
the difficulty of reaching in safety the expedition. I believe to have 
already informed your Excellency of his several messages to me to send 
troops to open the roads, that he may come to us with 10,000 men, that he 
has already prepared for the support of the Sultan’s expedition. 

The foregoing facts tend to show the expediency of sending an expe- 
dition of 1,000 men to the river of Damour, or more properly to a point of 
land running into the sea, a mile to the south of the river, forming alto- 
gether a position as strong as Djounie, and equally tenable with the 
assistance of two ships of war, in the midst of populous villages, and only 
distant four miles from Deir-el-Kammar, the capital of the mountains, and 
the residence of Emir Bechir, whom they propose to drive away as soon as 
they are armed. The chances are, that the Emir Bechir-el-Kasim will 
come to us immediately ; in which supposition if I am not wrong, then, the 
whole population of Lebanon will be up in arms to drive away the Egyp- 
tians, whose rear will be exposed to their attacks, their provisions will be 
cut off, and themselves obliged to fall back upon Balbec, leaving the 
mountains in possession of their inhabitants, and the Turkish troops free 
to act on some other part of Syria. 

The despatching, therefore, of 1,000 men, with two or three ships of 
war, and a few thousand stand of arms, to take temporary possession of 
the position alluded to above for this distribution, may be attended with 
the happiest result, and as such, I beg to submit the suggestion to your 
Excellency’s serious consideration. 

I have, &c., , 
(Signed) RICHARD WOOD. 


Inclosure 3 in No. 20. 
Circular Letter addressed to the Emirs and Sheiks of Damour. 


(Translation.) 


After the usual compliments. Sidon, September 27, 1840. 


AFTER informing ourselves of the state of your health, we have the 
honour to inform you, that the Turkish, English, and Austrian troops 
have captured Sidon. Their endeavours will be directed exclusively to 
free you from the tyranny and oppression of Mehemet Ali; and as your 
loyalty to His Highness the Sultan is well known to every one, we demand 
of you to use all your efforts in devising the means of coming to us at the 
river Damour, to be armed, both you and your Chiefs, in order that you 
may assist us in making you free and happy. May the Almighty extend 


his protecting hand over you all, &c., &c. 
(Signed) RICHARD WOOD. 


Inclosure 4 in No, 20. 


Circular Letter addressed by Mr. Wood to the Mutuali Sheiks, as noted per 
margin *, 
Most honoured Sirs, 
THE troops of His Imperial Highness the Sultan captured Sidon 


* Sheiks,—-Hassein Suleiman, Hamdi el Behr, Hasan el Muhamed, Fazl el Hasan, Hamd. 


20, 


yesterday ; and it cannot be unknown to you, honoured Sirs, that by the 
support of the Four Powers they have possessed themselves of 'T'sour, 
Caiffa, the mountains of Batroun, and, in short, they are masters of the 
whole sea-coast; nothing remains now but the capture of Acre. All the 
Syrians have with great readiness received our arms, to drive out of their 
country both Ibrahim Pasha and his army. , 

As all the people and Governors have returned to their duty to the 
Sultan, conformably to the sacred law (Koran), and as we are actually at 
Sidon, we write you to come and receive your arms in safety, and you will 
be rewarded for your services and loyalty. Every security shall be given 
you; and on your arrival, you, and your people, shall be further informed 
of facts that will be agreeable and satisfactory to you. Be assured before- 
hand, that you will be confirmed in your Government; and in the expec- 
tation of having the honour of seeing you on Wednesday next, may God 
give you. strength to decide according to the Holy Book. 

(Signed) RICHARD WOOD. 


Inclosure 5 in No. 20. 
Reply of the Mutuali Sheiks to Mr. Wood’s Circular Letter. 


(Translation. ) 


After the usual compliments. 

AT a most propitious moment we had the honour to receive your 
orders. We obey, again we obey, and we have already done the needful, 
and do hereby most formally submit and enter under the cloak of 
obedience. 

Your servant, and all who belong to him, return to their allegiance, 
which is comprised in the obedience we owe to the Sublime Porte, and to 
no other; but as we are a numerous people, and we enjoy certain rights 
and prerogatives which we inherit from our forefathers, being of the same 
sect (Mutualis) as ourselves, we will send a confidential servant to kiss 
* the hem of your garment, and to represent to your Excellency our 
position. 

All your servants submit to the orders of the Sublime Porte, and 
may you remain happy to the day of the Resurrection. 

(Signed) (L.S.) HASSAN SULMAN, 
Chief Sheik. 


Inclosure 6 in No. 20. 
Letter addressed by the Divan of Sidon to Iszet Pasha. 


(Translation.) 


IN the name of the Supreme God, of our Prophet, of his Parents, and 
of his Allies of happy memory. 


After prayers and compliments. 


We have the honour to expose to your Excellency, who is renowned 
for his great mercy, that on Sunday last (1st Shaban) the rays of your 
Excellency’s sun broke upon us, by being honoured with a revered 
despatch from the High Divan of your Excellency, inclosing an imperial 
firman from the Porte; as we had the honour to hear in a general 
assembly, and to meditate on, its contents, we rejoiced with a great joy at 
the goodness of the Almighty, who has deigned to grant us such a 
remarkable favour and concession, so much appreciated by us all, as that 
of replacing us under the dominion of the Ottoman Porte. May God give 
her always the victory. Your servants esteem themselves in especial 
happy (and we render thanks to our Maker) in having your Excellency of 
eminent superiority at our head as Governor, according to the tenor of 
the firman, before which we prostrate ourselves. 


21° 


One and all of us have lifted up our hands to Heaven, in humble 
supplication to preserve you to us, to give you the victory, and to cause to 
exist for ever the sovereignty of our Sultan, the Emperor, and the “Hakan 
of the Hawakins.” May the Almighty preserve him, and maintain his 
Government to the end of days! 

We, moreover, inform your Excellency, that we received this day 
your honoured Orders, addressed to the Chiefs and Princes of the districts 
and villages of our neighbourhood, which were given us by Colonel Haled 
Bey of the 2nd Regiment, and Abdullah Aga, the Secretary, who also 
instructed us, in the name of your Excellency, to distribute them sepa- 
rately, and to call upon the inhabitants to assist our Consuls to tranquil- 
lize the people, and to guarantee to them, in behalf of the Sublime Porte, 
their property, their lives, and welfare. 

Conformably to the above instructions, we have not neglected to 
publish everything, esteeming ourselves happy in having to perform so 
sacred a duty. 

We take the liberty to address this humble letter, and to subscribe 
ourselves your Excellency’s most humble servants, &c., &c., &c., 

(Signed) HAGI AHMED CALLUA-SHAKINEL-SAKIR, 
SEID AHMET, Governor of the Notables of Saida, 
MAHMOUD DERVISH, (Mufti.) 


Now 2b: 


MEMORANDUM. 


Londres, le 14 Novembre, 1840. 
LIINSTRUCTION adressée 4 Lord Ponsonby sous la date du 15 


Octobre dernier, 4 la suite d’une délibération entre les Plénipotentiaires 
d’Autriche, de la Grande Bretagne, de Prusse, et de Russie, a constaté 
Vopportunité qu’il y aurait 4 ce que les Représentans des Quatre Cours a 
Constantinople fussent autorisés 4 annoncer a la Sublime Porte: ‘* que leurs 
Gouvernemens respectifs, conformément aux stipulations du § 7 de l’Acte 
Séparé annexé a la Convention du 15 Juillet, croient devoir recommander 
fortement au Gouvernement de Sa Hautesse que,—dans le cas ob Méhémet 
Ali se soumettrait sans délai, et consentirait 4 restituer la flotte Ottomane, et 
de retirer ses troupes de la Syrie toute entiére, d’Adana, de Candie, de l’Arabie, 
et des Villes Saintes,—Sa Hautesse daignat non seulement réinstaller Méhé- 
met Ali dans ses fonctions comme Pacha d’Egypte, mais en méme tems lui 
accorder l’investiture héréditaire du dit Pachalic, d’aprés les conditions établies 
par la Convention du 15 Juillet, bien entendu que ce titre héréditaire serait 
sujet a étre révoqué si Méhémet Ali, ou lun de ses successeurs, venait & 
enfreindre les susdites conditions.” 

L’utilité d’adresser 4 la Sublime Porte une communication congue 
dans le sens ci-dessus énoncé, a été unanimement reconnue par les Quatre 
Cours. 

Néanmoins, pour faire ressortir davantage les justes égards dis aux 
droits de Sa Hautesse, le Cabinet de Vienne a été d’avis que les conseils que 
les Représentans des Quatre Cours seraient appelés dadresser au Divan relative- 
ment a la réintégration de Méhémet Ali dans le Pachalic de l’Egypte, ne 
devraient étre émis 4 Constantinople, qu’aprés que Méhémet Ali eit commencé 
par recourir en grace auprés de son Souverain, se soumettant aux décisions 
de Sa Hautesse. 

Prenant en considération que cette opinion du Cabinet de Vienne sert a 
constater de nouveau le respect que les Cours signataires de la Convention 
du 15 Juillet, portent 4 linviolabilité des droits de souveraineté et d’indé- 
pendance du Sultan,—considérant en outre la nécessité d’amener promptement 
Ja crise actuelle du Levant a une solution pacifique conforme aux vrais intéréts 
comme a la dignité de la Porte,—les Plénipotentiaires des dites Cours ont 
résolu d'un commun accord d’adopter la marche indiquée ci-dessus, afin que 
le recours en grace et la soumission de Méhémet Ali précédat les démarches - 
amicales que les Représentans Alliés seront chargés de faire pour disposer la 
Porte 4 accorder son pardon & Méhémet Ali. 


22 


Dans cette vue, désirant accélérer le plus possible le moment ou ces 
démarches pourront avoir lieu 4 Constantinople, les Plénipotentiaires des 
Quatre Cours ont jugé opportun de faire signaler sans le moindre délai a 
Méhémet Ali, la voie qui lui est encore ouverte pour rentrer en grace aupres 
de son Souverain, et obtenir sa réintégration dans le Pachalic de Egypte, 
nonobstant les événemens décisifs qui se sont déclarés contre lui. 

En conséquence il a été convenu en outre de communiquer 4 |’Ambas- 
sadeur de la Sublime Porte, Chékib Effendi, le présent Mémorandum ainsi 


que V’instructon qui s’y trouve annexée. 
(Paraphé) N 


be be he 


(Translation. ) 


London, November 14, 1840. 


THE instruction addressed to Lord Ponsonby on the 15th of October 
last, in consequence of a deliberation which had taken place between the 
Plenipotentiaries of Austria, Great Britain, Prussia, and Russia, recorded the 
propriety of the Representatives of the Four Courts at Constantinople being 
authorised to announce to the Sublime Porte, ‘‘ that their respective Govern- 
ments, in conformity with the stipulations of the seventh paragraph of the 
Separate Act annexed to the Convention of July 15, deem it their duty 
strongly to recommend to the Government of His Highness, that, in case 
Mehemet Ali should submit without delay, and should consent to restore the 
Ottoman fleet, to withdraw his troops from the whole of Syria, from Adana, 
Candia, Arabia, and the Holy Cities, His Highness should be pleased not 
only to reinstate Mehemet Ali in his functions as Pasha of Egypt, but at the 
same time to grant him the hereditary investiture of the said Pashalic, 
according to the conditions laid down in the Convention of July 15, it being 
well understood that this hereditary title should be liable to revocation, if 
Mehemet Ali, or one of his successors, should infringe the aforesaid. condi- 
tions.” 

The advantage of addressing to the Sublime Porte a communication 
couched in the sense above-mentioned, was unanimously admitted by the 
Four Courts. 

Nevertheless, in order to make still more apparent the just respect which 
is due to the rights of His Highness, the Cabinet of Vienna was of opinion 
that the advice which the Representatives of the Four Powers should be 
called upon to address to the Divan, relative to the reinstatement of Mehemet 
Ali in the Pashalic of Egypt, ought not to be put forth at Constantinople, 
until after Mehemet Ali should have taken the preliminary step of applying 
to his Sovereign for pardon, submitting himself to the determinations of His 
Highness. 

Taking into consideration that this opinion of the Cabinet of Vienna 
serves as a fresh proof of the respect which the Courts, parties to the 
Convention of July 15, entertain for the inviolability of the Sultan’s rights of 
Sovereignty and independence; considering, moreover, the necessity of 
speedily bringing the existing crisis in the Levant to a pacific solution, in 
conformity with the true interests, as likewise with the dignity of the Porte; 
the Plenipotentiaries of the said Courts have unanimously resolved to adopt 
the course above pointed out, in order that Mehemet Ali’s application for 
pardon and his submission should precede the friendly measures which the 
Allied Representatives will be instructed to adopt, in order to incline the 
Porte to grant its pardon to Mehemet Ali. 

With this view, the Plenipotentiaries of the Four Powers being desirous 
of hastening as. much as possible the moment when it will be possible for those 
measures to take place at Constantinople, have judged it fitting to cause to be 
pointed out without the least delay to Mehemet Ali, the way which is still 
open to him to regain the pardon of his Sovereign, and to obtain his rein- 
statement in the Pashalic of Egypt, notwithstanding the decisive events 
which have declared themselves against him. 


23 


In consequence it was further agreed to communicate to the Ambassador 
of the Sublime Porte, Chekib Effendi, the present Memorandum, as likewise 
the instruction thereunto annexed. 


(Initialed) N. 
A 
Ds 
B. 
No. 22. 
Viscount Palmerston to the Lords of the Admiralty. | 
My Lords, Foreign Office, November 14, 1840. 


THE Four Powers which, together with the Porte, are parties to the 
Treaty of the 15th of July, have resolved to recommend to the Porte, 
through their Representatives at Constantinople, that if Mehemet Ali shall 
at an early moment make his submission to the Sultan, and agree to 
restore immediately the Turkish fleet, and to cause his troops to evacuate 
the whole of Syria, the district of Adana, the Island of Candia, Arabia, 
and the Holy Cities, the Sultan should, notwithstanding the decree by 
which he has deprived Mehemet Ali of the Government of Egypt, reinstate 
Mehemet Ali in that Pashalic. 

In furtherance of that resolution, it has been determined by the 
Representatives of the Four Powers at London, that the intentions of the 
Four Powers, in this respect, should be made known to Mehemet Ali 
through the Admiral commanding in the Mediterranean. 

I have, therefore, to signify to your Lordships Her Majesty’s pleasure 
that instructions be given to Sir Robert Stopford, directing him to send 
immediately a competent officer to Alexandria, in order to make the 
following communication to Mehemet Ali. 

The officer so to be sent, will, on his arrival at Alexandria, demand 
to have an interview with Mehemet Ali, in the presence of Boghos Bey, in 
order to make to Mehemet Ali a communication from Her Majesty’s 
Government. When admitted, he should state to Mehemet Ali that he is 
ordered by the British Government to inform him, that if he will make 
immediate submission to the Sultan, and will deliver into the hands of the 
officer so sent a written engagement to restore, without further delay, the 
Turkish fleet, and to cause his troops immediately to evacuate the whole 
of Syria, the district of Adana, the Island of Candia, Arabia, and the 
Holy Cities, the Four Powers will recommend to the Sultan to reinstate 
Mehemet Ali in the Pashalic of Egypt. But the officer will state that 
this recommendation will be given by the Four Powers, only in the event 
of the prompt submission of Mehemet Ali, and that the officer is directed 
to remain three days at Alexandria, to know the decision of Mehemet Ali, 
and to convey it to Constantinople. 

The officer employed should put down the foregoing communication 
in writing, and after having read it to Mehemet Ali, he should deliver to 
him the paper on which it is written. 

If, at the end of the three days, Mehemet Ali should not have deter- 
mined to make his submission to the Sultan, the officer should re-embark, 
and should proceed to Constantinople to make his report to Her Majesty’s 
Ambassador at that Court. If Mehemet Ali should at any time during 
the three days deliver to the officer the written engagement above 
mentioned, the officer should immediately proceed with it to Con- 
stantinople. 

But the officer should require that the written document to be given 
to him by Mehemet Ali, should be placed in his hands open, so that he 
may be able to inform himself of its contents ; and he will decline to 
convey it to Constantinople, if he should find that it does not contain the 
above-mentioned engagement. 

Tam, & 


? C., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


» 24 


No. 23. 


Viscount Palmerston to the Lords of the Admiralty. 


My Lords, Foreign Office, November 14, 1840. 


WITH reference to my other letter of this day’s date, I have to 
signify to your Lordships the Queen’s pleasure that the officer who may 
be sent by Sir Robert Stopford to Alexandria, should be instructed, that 
if the written document which .Mehemet Ali may deliver to him for the 
purpose of its being transmitted to Constantinople, should contain the 
expression of a desire on the part of Mehemet Ali to obtain hereditary 
tenure of the Pashalic of Egypt, the officer shall not on that account 
decline to receive and to convey the document, provided it shall also 
contain the engagement mentioned in my other letter of this day. 

Iam, &c., 


(Gigned) | PALMERSTON. 


No. 24. 
Viscount Palmerston to the Lords of the Admiralty. 


My Lords, | Foreign Office, November 14, 1840. 


WITH further reference to my other letters of this day, I am to 
signify to your Lordships the Queen’s commands that Admiral Sir Robert 
Stopford should be informed that he is not in any degree to suspend his 
operations, or to relax his efforts, on account of the communication which 
he is instructed to make to Mehemet Ali; but, on the contrary, he should 
continue to push on with vigour his operations for the purpose of expelling 
the Egyptians from the whole of Syria, and he should not slacken in his 
exertions, till he learns from Constantinople that an arrangement has 
been made with Mehemet Ali. 

Iam, & 


? C., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 25. 
Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 15.) 


My Lord, Paris, November 13, 1840. 
IN my despatch of the 6th instant, I stated that M. Guizot had 
read to me a despatch which he had written to Baron Bourqueney, 
and which the French Chargé d’ Affaires had received instructions to com- 
municate to your Lordship. . I have to express my regret at having led 
your Lordship into error in regard to the nature of that communication. 

M. Guizot has since shown to me the paper he read. It was a private 
letter, and not an official despatch, which he addressed to Baron Bour- 
queney ; and the French Minister had no intention, in directing the Baron 
to put your Lordship in possession of the contents of this private letter, to 
make an official proposition to Her Majesty’s Government. 

M. Guizot was desirous, before he made any official proposition to 
your Lordship with regard to France becoming a party to the settlement 
of the Eastern Question, to ascertain whether it were likely that such 
proposition would be favourably received, and with this view he wrote his 
private letter to the Baron de Bourqueney. 

_ Baron Bourqueney having collected from your Lordship’s conver- 
sation, that the proposal of any arrangement more favourable to Mehemet 
Ali than the Treaty of July would not be listened to by the Allies of the 
Sultan, abstained from entering into any explanation of different projects 
of peace between the Porte and the Pasha, founded upon that basis, to 
which the French Government was ready to agree. 


25 


M. Guizot has told me, unofficially, that according to the first of 
those projects, the hereditary government of the Pashalic of Acre, 
as well as that of Egypt, would be conceded to Mehemet Ali; that, accord- 
ing to the second, the Pashalics of Acre and of Tripoli for life, with 
the hereditary government of Egypt; and, according to a third project, 
the hereditary government of Egypt, with the Pashalic of Acre and 
the government of Candia for life. With respect to the suspension of hos- 
tilities on a future day to be fixed, and the opening a negotiation for peace, 
on the basis of the actual state of military occupation at the time of the 
armistice, as suggested by M. Guizot in the conversation I held with him 
on Friday last, he said to me this day, that he does not consider that 
suggestion, which he made only with reference to another of a similar 
kind made by Baron Bulow to M. Bourqueney, as an official proposition 
addressed to Her Majesty’s Government, but merely as an intimation that 
in case the Allied Powers should desire the concurrence of France in the 
settlement of the affairs of the East, the French Government would be 
ready to enter into negotiation upon that basis. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) GRANVILLE. 


No. 26. 
Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 15.) 


(Extract.) ‘ Paris, November 13, 1840. 


THE publication of your Lordship’s despatch of the 2nd of this 
month, in which you reply to M. Thiers’ despatch of the 8th of October, 
relative to the deposition of Mehemet Ali, has made great sensation in the 
political society of Paris. It was nearly the sole subject of conversation 
at the hotels of the Ministers who received company last night; and 
M. Guizot was closely questioned by some of his supporters who are the 
advocates of a pacific policy, as to the construction he put upon your 
Lordship’s despatch, and had some difficulty in satisfying his interrogators 
that your Lordship, in asserting the right of the Sultan to appoint whom 
he pleased to govern particular portions of his dominions, did not mean to 
declare the intention of expelling Mehemet Ali from Egypt. M. Guizot 
expressed to me his belief, a belief, he said, founded on his reliance on 
your word, that it was not the intention of the Allies, if they succeeded 

in driving the Egyptians out of Syria, to attack Egypt. 


No. 27. 
Viscount Palmerston to Earl Granville. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, November 16, 1840. 


I HAVE received your Excellency’s despatch of the 13th instant, 
explaining an error in the statement made in your despatch of the 6th 
instant, relative to the nature of the communication which M. Guizot had 
desired to make to me, through M. de Bourqueney, before he made any 
official proposition to me with regard to France becoming a party to the 
settlement of the Eastern Question. 

With reference to this explanation, I have to state to your Excellency, 
that it must be apparent that the rapid progress of events in Syria has put 
all contingent suggestions of an earlier date out of the question, even if 
in any case such suggestions could, as being departures from the Treaty 


of the 15th July, have been subjects for discussion. 
I am, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


ee seeneemnnemmnemmnsiacmmnemetesesacssioeneccsusmecmscecaesaaasaaamssaasaaaaaaaaaaaaaansaaaal 
i 


26 
No. 28. 


Viscount Palmerston to Earl Granville. 
My Lord, Foreign Office, November 16, 1840. 


I INCLOSE for your Excellency’s information, copies of three letters 
which I addressed on the 14th instant to the Lords Commissioners of the 
Admiralty, signifying ‘to their Lordships the Queen’s commands as to 
instructions to be sent to Admiral Sir Robert Stopford to make a commu- 
nication to Mehemet Ali, in the name of the Four Powers who concluded 
with the Porte the Treaty of the 15th of July. 

‘Tam, &c 


(Signed)’ | PALMERSTON. 


y, 


No. 29. 


Viscount Palmerston to Earl Granville. 
My Lord, Foreign Office, November 16, 1840. 


IN answer to your Excellency’s despatch of the 13th instant, 
[have to instruct you to state to M. Guizot, that he is quite right in 
stating, that I said to him before he left England that it is not the mnten- 
tion or wish of the Allies to expel Mehemet Ali from Egypt, and that the 
object of the operations now in progress is to restore Syria to the direct 
authority of the Sultan; and the instructions to Sir Robert Stopford, of 
which I send you copies, and which you will read confidentially to M. 
Guizot, are a proof of the sincerity of the statement which I made to him. 
But M. Guizot must himself see, that the Sultan and his Allies would 
be in an embarrassing situation, if, after they had expelled the Egyptians 
from Syria, Mehemet Ali should still refuse to make his submission to the 
Sultan, should persist in retaining the Turkish fleet, and should remain in 
a posture of armed rebellion. 

It may be hoped, however, that there is little chance of such a state of 
things; and it is probable that the communication which Sir Robert 
Stopford has been instructed to make to Mehemet Ali, may bring about a 
satisfactory settlement of these affairs. 

lam, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 30. 


Colonel Sir Charles F. Smith to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received October 6.) 


H. M. 8. ** Princess Charlotte,” 
(Extract.) September 19, 1840. 


THE orders I had the honour of receiving from the Master-General 
of the Ordnance, as to stores and detachments, prior to my sailing from 
Gibraltar, have all been duly executed by me. Considerations of 
some importance with Sir Robert Stopford, and a belief that immediate 
advantages, on certain local questions, must result from an interview with 
Lord Ponsonby, led to an arrangement for my going to Constantinople with 
despatches; but, I believe, quarantine regulations are likely to put a stop 
toit. In which case, I will venture to send his Excellency an extract from 
this communication, in the expectation that his powers may enable him, in 
part, to anticipate your Lordship’s commands, and do much towards guiding 
us in our present duties and future proceedings with the Turks. 

ee a SES nna Sob 


No. 31. 


Colonel Sir Charles F. Smith to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received October 21.) 


My Lord, Therapia, Constantinople, October 2, 1840. 


AFTER despatching the letter I had the honour of addressing to your 
Lordship on the 19th ultimo, it was ascertained that, by passing Constan- 


27 


tinople and coming direct to this place, the restrictions of quarantine might 
be avoided ; accordingly, Sir Robert Stopford reverted to his former etic 
and ordered a steamer to proceed, For the good of the service upon which 
Iam employed, as well as for every consideration of a personal nature, I 
rejoice at the measure we adopted. 

All questions of a doubtful character that have not been referred to your 
Lordship by Lord Ponsonby, have been most satisfactorily solved by his 
Excellency, for whose energetic and successful proceedings with the Autho- 
rities on the spot I can never be sufficiently grateful. 

We return to the coast of Syria to-morrow, armed with all the powers 
that can be extended by the Sultan towards fulfilling the commands of Her 


-Majesty’s Government. I have, &c., 
(Signed) C. F. SMITH, 
Colonel. 
No. 32. 
Colonel Sir Charles F. Smith to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 15.) 
My Lord, Beyrout, October 14, 1840. 


YOUR Lordship will have been made acquainted through the despatches 
of the Commander-in-Chief on the Mediterranean station of the surrender, 
during my absence on duty at Constantinople, of Tyre and Sidon to Her 
Majesty’s ships and vessels. 

I have now the satisfaction to inform your Lordship, that on the night of 
the 9th instant, a report of the troops of Mehemet Ali having evacuated the town 
of Beyrout reached Sir Robert Stopford. At daylight the following morning 
Captain Henderson of Her Majesty’s ship “ Edinburgh,” landed with me for 
the purpose of ascertaining the fact, when he hoisted the Ottoman flag on the 
works; at 3 a.m., of the 11th, a Colonel of the Egyptian army treated with me 
for terms of surrender for 2,000 of his officers and men: later in the day the 
remainder of the Infantry in the camp of Solyman Pasha followed the example, 
and a detachment from the small force I had the means, in the first instance, 
of throwing into Beyrout, marched out, under the direction of Lieutenant 
Aldrich, British Engineers, and took possession of twenty field-guns. 

Inclosed are returns of the arms, ammunition, and stores, that have 
fallen into the hands of the Allied Forces under my command. 

Lhave, &c., 
(Signed) C. F. SMITH, 
Colonel Commanding. 

P.S.—I have forwarded to Lord Ponsonby the colours of the Egyptian 

corps, and the flag of Beyrout for presentation to the Sultan. Caras. 


Inclosure 1] in No. 32. 


Return of Ordnance, Ammunition, Stores, Small Arms, Camp Equipage, 
&c. &c., seized from the Enemy, in their Camp before Beyrout, on the Morning of 
the \1th of October. 


ORDNANCE. Ammunition 
Caissons, Camp 
each Stores. |Small Arms} Equipage. REMARKS. 
Long Short | Short 12- | containing 
4-pounders |6-pounders.| pounders. | 168 rounds. 


an | SY OS 
ene ad 


Provision 

for 3,000 Bell 
men for} 1,000 Tents, 
three or 130 
four days. 


Dismounted. 


Delivered by the pri- 


1,500 soners at the gates. 


T. GORDON HIGGINS, 
Beyrout, October 14, 1841. E 2 Major commanding Royal Artillery. 


_—  o-) 


ee ee ee ee a ee ee 
oe aad 


28 


Inclosure 2 in No, 32. 
Beyrout, October 14, 1840. 


Return of Ordnance, Ammunition, Stores, Small Arms, Provisions, &c., seized 
in Beyrout, on the Morning of the 10th wstant. 


DESCRIPTION OF GUNS AND STORES. 


Medium Iron Guns, 31, dismounted on the walls. 


Carronades .. .. 4, ditto ditto 
Jerry Mo WENGEY oo gie bac Geb tod Gowe sam) 36 basoGp = 126,000 
Small arms (unserviceable) taken from the mountaineers on the 
ATS INSUTLECtIONA ME Ee facteers le sbac oa es Besse eueic eh ae eoeeiees 8,000 stand. 
Rice, Wheat, and Bread, for three or four days. 
Common Case, 24 pounders, filled with iron balls..........-... 932 rounds. 
* 18 ditto dittoh) .c2he3. Ieee 48 
BF 9 ditto ditto WW jcce one > laste ae 296 
a 6 ditto CItbOin ae cectey ec Pae aces 587 
Mound shot 24 and F2 pouliders’ oie. esses vein oe ooh ge 200 
Fuzes FGOnminom ae SR. AEG. MOT AS. AIS) Heeb woh aaa 200 
Port= fines y 4 frrtte Be he TRIS A ad Ale Biel Ot VEL he eee a otee 24 
Slowematch,. SKeinsQts.. 22% 3. shan sos ehyeindieleg ds Pete aera 18 
Panery ball Cartrid ee eve crap oc ae S os ois a gaa as ie dad 3 reams. 
Plies, WISQUCE oe ak oe oe 5 ae Gin. baie ec thn camer e ste et ca cutee Ee 500 


T. GORDON HIGGINS, 
Major Commanding Royal Artillery. 


No. 33.: 
Colonel Sir Charles F. Smith to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewed November 15.) 


(Extract. ) Beyrout, October 22, 1840. 


THE detention of Her Majesty’s ship “‘ Cyclops,” which I was informed 
on board the flag ship would be the first opportunity for the conveyance of 
despatches to Europe, makes me apprehensive that mine of the 14th will not 
reach London so early as will other communications of like date, forwarded 
by way of Constantinople. 

I have now the honour to acquaint your Lordship, that Tripoli was 
evacuated upon, an Austrian corvette (without any hostile intention) anchor- 
ing off the town. Tortosa and Latakia are also abandoned. On those events 
I have to remark that, independently of the increased number of points to 
look after, they occasion an extension of the flank upon which I do not medi- 
tate active operations, and the release for active purposes of about 5,000 of 
the enemy’s troops. 

Ibrahim Pasha has concentrated the portion of his original force that he 
can depend upon, at Zahle, where, and at Damascus, are his principal depéts, 
having very wisely left the dead weight, and disaffected to be fed by the 
Turkish Government. From Zahle, he can move by easy lines of communi- 
cation upon any of the almost defenceless towns we hold; and he, probably, 
will do so when the season becomes so far advanced as to cause the ships of 
war to quit their anchorage on the coast. 

Amidst interruptions of the most perplexing nature, I have been endea- 
vouring to restore order. 

I have to carry on the details of the whole Turkish force. At Sidon I 
am endeavouring to raise a corps of cavalry, which will be essentially 
important when the base of operations rests, as I intend it should do, upon 
that place and Tyre. 


_ P.S.—The European troops are extremely unhealthy; this day’s return 
gives 25 per cent. in hospital: and, since writing the letter, of which this is a 
duplicate, the per centage has increased to 30. 


eens Ee OE 


29 
No. 34. 
Mr. Consul Larking to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 15.) 


My Lord, Alexandria, October 16, 1840. 

SINCE I had the honour to address your Lordship on the 6th instant, 
nothing of material importance has occurred. 

The country remains quiet, with the exception of a slight manifestation 
of discontent amongst the Cairo Militia, owing to a report that a part of 
them were to be sent to Syria. 

On hearing this, Mehemet Ali went immediately to Cairo, and by his 
presence restored tranquillity; and, at the same time, ordered that the 
communications with Suez, which had undergone a momentary stoppage, 
should be reopened, and every facility given by the authorities for the 
transmission of mails and the safe passage of travellers. 

_Captain Johnson, the East India Company’s Deputy Agent, has 
applied to Mehemet Ali, and obtained from him an officer to escort the 
mails from Suez should they arrive, in which case we may expect them at 
Alexandria on the 21st or 22nd instant. 

_ Great activity prevails in strengthening the fortifications of Alexan- 
dria under the superintendence of Colonel Galisse. The equipment of the 
combined fleet is going on, and nearly completed; the Turkish sailors 
have not been removed, although their discontent rather increases. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) JOHN W. LARKING. 

P.S.—October 17. Intelligence has been received this morning from 
Syria of the defection of the Emir Bechir, and the desertion of several 
regiments in Mehemet Ali’s service; and that Solyman Pasha has, conse- 


quently, been obliged to evacuate Beyrout, and is endeavouring to join 
Ibrahim. 


No. 35. 
Mr. Consul Larking to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewed November 15.) 


My Lord, Alexandria, October 28, 1840. 


_ IN my last despatch of the 16th instant, I had the honour to inform 
your Lordship, that Mehemet Ali had received intelligence of the suc- 
cessive defeats of his troops in Syria, and also of the defection of the 
Emir Bechir. 

This intelligence at first affected him much, but has not prevented 
him making the greatest efforts to support his son Ibrahim; in this view 
he is collecting a large number of camels at Cairo to transport provisions 
and ammunition. 

He has also had recourse to the expedient of recalling from Cairo | 
Sheik Abou Naked and Sheik Ali, and his son, of the family of Abd il 
Malek. ‘These individuals were partizans of the Sheik Bechir, who was 
killed about fifteen years ago, and have been for the last seven years 
living at Cairo in a sort of honourable captivity, at the instance of the 
Emir Bechir, who confiscated their property, but afterwards, at Mehemet 
Ali’s request, allowed them its usufruct. They are all of the Druse religion, 
and are expected to arrive in Alexandria forthwith, when one of them is to 
receive the pseudo-investiture of the principality of Mount Lebanon. 

The Sheiks banished to Sennaar about two months ago have also been 
sent for, with a view to their liberation, in order that they may combine 
with the above-mentioned individuals in producing dissension in Mount 
Lebanon. 

Notwithstanding these measures, and the encouragement givenhim by 
M. Cochelet and Count Walewski, it is evident, that Mehemet Ali has no 
longer that confidence in his position which he formerly possessed; and I 
believe I am correct in assuming, that he has now renounced all hope of 
being able to retain possession of Syria, if left to his own resources, and 


i ee ee ee i i eee 


30. 


that in his present efforts he is actuated by the vain hope instilled into his 
policy, through French agency, that if Ibrahim can hold out till the spring, 
French negotiation will save him, and eventually insure him the possession 
of those provinces. 

Although the influence of France in this country is at present great, 
If I may venture an opinion, I should say, that Mehemet, Ali begins to 
doubt whether the Government of that nation can assist him in the pre- 
sent crisis, and [ think I can perceive a desire on his part for a reconcilia- 
tion with England. I am led to this conclusion from his conversations, 
and I think another instance in favour of the assumption, is the great 
facility he is affording to British commercial interests, both as regards 
the shipping here, and the assistance he has just afforded in transmitting 
the India mails from Suez to this port. 

These mails arrived here this morning, and proceed at once to Malta 
by the “ Liverpool” steamer. 

I have, & 


ne 
(Signed) JOHN W. LARKING. 


ee 


No. 36. 


Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Receiwved November 21.) 


(Extract.) Vienna, November 14, 1840. 


AS Prince Metternich’s last despatches to Paris will have been com- 
municated to your Lordship, I need give no account of their contents. 

The immediate motive for writing them arose from the necessity in 
which the Prince found himself of accounting for his conduct in with- 
holding instructions to the Internuncio to concur in the step prescribed to 
Lord Ponsonby by your Lordship’s despatch of October 15th. 

The publication of that despatch in the newspapers led him to appre- 
hend that Austria would be held up as standing in the way of an amicable 
settlement of existing differences, and he therefore hastened to explain the 
motives of his conduct. ) 

He took this opportunity of inculcating upon the French Government 
that the best course they could pursue would be that of determining 
Mehemet Ali to an early submission. 

Having had repeated opportunities of hearing from the Prince his 
opinion as to the terms which might in that case be granted to the Pasha, 
I may state that these terms do not include the cession of any part of 
Syria, which, with the fortress of St. Jean d’Acre, must, in his opinion, be 
restored entire to the Sultan. With regard to Egypt, the Prince holds 
that the conditions upon which it may be conceded to Mehemet Ali must 
depend upon the circumstances of the moment when he shall make his 
submission. The most advantageous terms upon which it might be 
granted to him would be hereditarily to him and his descendants. The 
least advantageous would be those upon which he lately held it, during 
the Sultan’s pleasure. Between these two extreme points there are many 
modifications, any one of which might be adopted according to the circum- 
stances of the moment. I have represented to the Prince that the notion 
of granting Egypt hereditarily to Mehemet Ali had been put forwards in 
the first instance as a compensation for his relinquishment of other parts 
of the Sultan’s dominions, but that if he should delay his submission until 
Acre had been wrested from him, he would no longer have anything to 
offer in return for the boon. In this reasoning the Prince fully acquiesced. 

If St. Jean d’Acre should neither be taken before the bad weather 
sets in, nor be ceded by Mehemet Ali during the winter, Prince Metternich 
is fully prepared to see it attacked in spring; nor do I think that in such 
a case Austria would withhold such assistance as might be necessary to 
advance the success of the operation. 


nee EP Oe Oe 


31 


No. 37. 
Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 18.) 


(Extract.) Paris, November 16, 1840. 


I RECEIVED yesterday your Lordship’s despatches of the 12th and 
13th instant. . 

I communicated this morning to M. Guizot the substance of the des- 
‘patches, and learnt from him, that Baron Bourqueney’s report of his conver- 
sation with your Lordship corresponds with the statement made in your 
Lordship’s despatch. 

M. Guizot intimated to me, that he felt himself precluded by that con- 
versation from making any further communication on the subject to Her 
Majesty’s Government ; and that the French Government would wait for 
events, prepared to take such course as those events might render expedient. 

Count Appony yesterday communicated to M. Guizot a despatch - 
of Prince Metternich, written after the intelligence had reached Vienna of 
the change of Ministry in France, and of the appointment of M. Guizot <o 
the department of Foreign Affairs. The despatch is written in a very 
friendly spirit to M. Guizot. Prince Metternich apprehends that in the 
present excited state of France, a pacific Ministry will have great difficul- 
ties to encounter; and conceiving that the settlement of peace between the 
Sultan and the Viceroy of Egypt will not be complete unless France con- 
curs in it, is disposed to afford facilities for the attainment of that object. 

A suggestion is thrown out by the Austrian Minister, that the 
influence of France should be exerted over Mehemet Ali, to persuade him 
to solicit his Sovereign to invest him with the hereditary government of 
Egypt on the condition of his yielding the rest of his possessions, whilst 
the Four Allied Powers should use their influence at Constantinople to 
induce the Sultan to comply with the request of the Pasha. 

M. Guizot, I hear from Count Appony, gave a favourable attention to 
this suggestion; indeed, I have reason to believe that he has already 
written to M. Cochelet, to urge the Viceroy to take the step suggested by 
the Austrian Minister. 


No. 38. 


Viscount Palmerston to Earl Granville. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, November 20, 1840. 

WITH reference to your Excellency’s despatch of the 16th instant, 
in which you report that a disposition exists on the part of one of 
the Powers, parties to the Treaty of the 15th July, to make concessions, in 
regard to Turkish Affairs, to France under M. Guizot, which the Allies 
declined to make to France under M. Thiers, I have to state to your 
Excellency that this distinction does not seem founded upon any just 

round. 

If the Allied Powers refused to France, under M. Thiers, the conces- 
sions which M. Thiers demanded, which were, that the whole, or an 
important portion, of Syria should be left in the occupation of Mehemet 
Ali, the Allied Powers did not do so on account of any personal feeling on 
the part of the Allies against M. Thiers, but because they thought that 
such an arrangement as that desired by M. Thiers would be destructive 
of the integrity of the Turkish Empire, detrimental to the independence of 
the Sultan, injurious to the balance of power, and dangerous in its results 
to the peace of Europe. 

Now, none of these considerations can be altered by the circumstance 
that M. Thiers has been succeeded by M. Guizot, and that the latter 
directs, for the present, the Foreign Affairs of France; for, even if the 
force of these considerations depended, which it obviously does not, upon 
the personal character of the individual who may hold at a particular 
moment a particular office in France, it must be recollected that the 
arrangements, to which the concessions in question relate, are meant to 


32 


be permanent, while the retention of power by any given individual in 
é ee 
France, or in any other country, must necessarily be uncertain and pre 
carious, and, in any case, of comparatively limited Ce 
am 


i, 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 39. 


Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 
My Lord, Foreign Office, November 14, 1840. 


I INCLOSE for your Excellency’s information, copies of three letters 
which I have this day addressed to the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, 
signifying to their Lordships the Queen’s commands as to instructions to be 
sent to Admiral Sir Robert Stopford, to make a communication to Mehemet 
Ali in the name of the Four Powers, who concluded with the Porte the 
Convention of the 15th of July. 

Tam, &c. 


(Siened)| | PALMERSTON. 
i AU ea asco) trees AE Rage Waid Te te OE 


No. 40. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewed November 21.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, October 28, 1840. 


THE Sultan did me the honour to grant me an audience on the 2nd inst. 
All His Majesty’s Ministers were present. 

I had the honour to lay at His Majesty’s feet the standard taken from 
Ibrahim Pasha on the 10th of October by the Ottoman troops acting under the 
orders of Commodore Napier. 

It was necessary to say a few words to His Majesty, and I inclose a report 
of them. 

His Imperial’ Majesty was pleased to desire me to assure his august Ally, 
Her Majesty, of His Imperial Majesty’s most grateful acknowledgment of the 
friendly assistance afforded him by Her Majesty and his Allies, and that he hoped 
that friendly aid would lead to still more intimate friendship between himself 
and Her Majesty. 

The Sultan was graciously pleased to express his approbation of my 
conduct. 

The standard presented is the standard of the Second Regiment of Guards, ~ 
and granted to that regiment for its service at the taking of St. Jean d’Acre in 
1831. The Second is esteemed one of the best Regiments in the Egyptian 
service, and Ibrahim was at its head when it lost the standard. The flag is 
white, having religious sentences upon it, written in golden characters. 


Inclosure in No. 40. 


Speech made by Viscount Ponsonby to the Sultan when he delivered to His 
Muajesty the Sacred Standard taken by the Turkish Troops from Ibrahim Pasha 
on the 10th October, 1840. 

Sire, 

I SOLICITED the honour of being admitted to the presence of your 
Imperial Majesty, that I might lay at the foot of your Majesty’s throne the 
standard taken in battle by your Majesty’s valiant troops, and sent to me from 
the officer who had the happiness to direct the actions of those brave men in 
the glorious combat of the 10th of October. 

A few weeks since, some rebellious subjects of your Majesty boasted that 
this standard should’ be displayed before the capital of your empire. The 
standard is now here, a monument of the triumph of your Majesty’s arms, and 
an evidence of the error of those who proclaimed the weakness of the Sublime 
Porte, and the power of the late Pasha of Egypt. 


nent tise eee! olka 


No. 41. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 21.) 


My Lord, Therapia, October 28, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to inclose herewith, copy of a letter which, in 
obedience to your Lordship’s instructions, I have addressed to Admiral Sir 
Robert Stopford. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


P.S.—The Admiral’s despatches will be forwarded by the first opportunity. 


Inclosure in No. 41. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Admiral Stopford. 


Sir, Therapia, October 25, 1840. 


I HAVE been directed by Lord Palmerston to inform you, that the right 
of commercial blockade, that is to say, the right of preventing neutral merchant 
ships from entering a blockaded port, is a belligerent right, which can be 
exercised only by a State against another State with which itis at war. But no 
State can be at war with the subject of another State; because war cannot be 
waged, except with those with whom peace can be made: but no treaty of 
peace can be concluded with a subject who has no independent will, and 
who must follow the orders of his Sovereign, in peace or war, and who cannot 
make peace or war for himself. All we can do is, to prevent the Egyptian 
ships of war from coming out of port, and by so doing we help the Turkish 
blockade ; but our ships cannot stop nor search any neutral merchantmen, 
whether English, or French, or other. 

Having, in pursuance of Lord Palmerston’s directions, made the above 
communication to you, I beg leave to add, that there is no impeachment of the 
right of the Sublime Porte to establish a blockade of the strictest nature, and to 
enforce it by the Ottoman ships of war. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No. 42. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 21.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, November 1, 1840. 


I REGRET extremely that I could not get means to forward before 
yesterday to the Admiral his instructions about St. Jean d’Acre. I fear he 
may have left the coast, to take refuge in Marmorice Bay, before they reach 
him. 

I learn from excellent authority, that the greatest confusion and disaffection 
prevails in the garrison of St. Jean d’Acre, which consists of 4,000 men, and 
that Ibrahim Pasha is so suspicious of the chiefs, that he has had one of them 
(Said Mohamed) arrested, and has ordered Scheriff Pasha, of Damascus, to go 
there as fast as possible to take the command. 

Ibrahim, with from 10,000 to 12,000 men, is near Zachlé, in the plain be- 
tween Lebanon and Anti-Libanus : I believe the place is named Malacha. He 
will have the greatest difficulty in obtaining provisions. It is certain that the 
Haouran and the Ledgea will revolt immediately, and aid the rest of the 
country. The inhabitants of Damascus are extremely ill disposed towards 
Ibrahim, and the people of Hebron have risen en masse. _ 6 le 

The mountaineers have cut off the retreat of the garrison of Tripoli, which 
was directed on Balbec, and the report is current, and believed, that it was 
the appearance of a British vessel off Alexandretta that induced the troops 
(Egyptian) to evacuate Latakia and ay 


34 


The French are endeavouring to raise the Syrians against the Sultan, but 
their unceasing activity has not succeeded. 

A Regiment of 2,500 men and its Colonel deserted from the Egyptians. 
Izzet Pasha gave the Colonel the rank of Pasha. He has arrived here. 


No. 43. 


Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, November 24, 1840. 


I INCLOSE, for your Excellency’s information, a copy of a Memorandum 
which was recorded by the Plenipotentiaries of the Four Powers on the 14th of 
November, and on which was founded my letter to the Admiralty of that day, 
directing that Sir Robert Stopford should be instructed to make to Mehemet 
Ali the communication therein specified. 

Iam, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 44. 
Lord William Russell to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewed November 24.) 


My Lord, Berlin, November 18, 1840. 


LORD GRANVILLE, in his despatch to your Lordship of the 23rd 
ultimo, says, ‘‘that M. Thiers spoke of despatches he had received from 
Count Bresson, which stated that the Prussian Government propose making 
some propositions to the other parties to the Treaty of the 15th of July, 
calculated to bring about an arrangement between the Sultan and Mehemet 
Ali, in which the French Government might concur.”” J asked Baron Werther 
if it was so, as he had never spoken to me of these propositions ; his Excellency 
said that Count Bresson must have mistaken his meaning, for he never had the 
intention of making any propositions, and had repeatedly told Count Bresson, 
that if France wished to become a party to the Convention, she must take the 
initiative, and that the Four Powers must continue to execute the stipulations 
of the Treaty until it was accepted by Mehemet Ali. 

T have, &c., 
(Signed) WILLIAM RUSSELL, 


No. 45. 
Mr. Bloomfield to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 24.) 


(Extract.) St. Petersburgh, November 11, 1840. 

COUNT NESSELRODE continues in his opinion, that it is impossible for 
the Allies to take the initiative in any overture to France ; and the despatches 
since received from Baron Brunnow giving an account of the objections raised 
by your Lordship to Prince Metternich’s proposal of a meeting at Wiesbaden, 
have confirmed Count Nesselrode in the determination of the Russian Cabinet 
to await events. . 

His Excellency read me these despatches this morning, and expressed his 
reliance in the firmness of the British Cabinet to carry out the stipulations of 
the Convention of July to their full extent. 

Count Nesselrode has learnt from Vienna, that Prince Metternich has 
modified the instructions to the Internuncio, which it was expected would 
have been forwarded in exact conformity with your Lordship’s despatch to 
Lord Ponsonby, of the 15th of October. | 


SSeS SS sss sss sssnsnsnsintevennensesenens 


35 
No. 46. 
Viscount Palmerston to Mr. Bloomfield. : 
(Extract.) Foreign Office, November 26, 1840: 


BARON BRUNNOW has, from first to last, since he came here in Septem 
ber, 1839, down to the present time, maintained the same tone and held the same 
language. He has always stated the desire of his Government to settle the 
arrangements between the Sultan and Mehemet Ali upon the basis originally 
put forward by England, namely, that the whole of Syria should be restored 
to the direct authority of the Sultan, and that nothing but Egypt should be 
left to Mehemet Ali; but Baron Brunnow has never insisted upon his 
opinions, so as to throw obstacles in the way of a reasonable and satisfactory 
arrangement. 

Baron Brunnow has, ever since the Treaty was signed, held on all occasions 
the same language as Her Majesty’s Government, namely, that the Treaty could 
not be abandoned and must be executed; but while, on the one hand, before the 
Treaty was signed, he threw no obstacles in the way to prevent the accession of 
France thereto, so since it was signed, he has never urged measures calculated 
to bring on a war between France and the Four Powers. 

Now, however, the operations in Syria have been attended with signal 
success ; the French Government has decided for peace, and the Chamber seems 
resolved to support that policy; and both the Austrian and Prussian Govern- 
ments have declared that the Treaty must be executed, and that Mehemet Ali 
can in no case be allowed to retain more than Egypt. 


No. 47. 


Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston.—(Receiwed November 24.) 


My Lord, Paris, November 20, 1840. 


I RECEIVED by the post on Wednesday last your Lordship’s despatches of 
the 16th of November, and it appearing to me to be important that no time 
‘should be lost in communicating to M. Guizot the instructions which the Lords 
-Commissioners of the Admiralty have been directed by your Lordship’s letters 
of the 14th instant to send to Sir Robert Stopford, [ availed myself of the 
opportunity of my meeting M. Guizot at dinner that evening at the Tuileries, 
to read to his Excellency confidentially those letters. I also read to the 
French Minister your despatch in which you observe that the Sultan and his 
Allies would be im an embarrassing situation, if, after they had expelled the 
Egyptians from Syria, Mehemet Ali should still refuse to make his submission 
to the Sultan, should still persist in retaining the Turkish fleet, and should 
remain im a posture of rebellion. M. Guizot received with satisfaction my 
communication, and upon my saying that I had been induced to make it at the 
earliest moment, m order that he might not lose the opportunity of writing to 
M. Cochelet on the subject of it, by the first steam packet which might leave 
Marseilles or Toulon for the Levant ; he answered, that he would write immedi- 
ately to M. Cochelet, and give orders by the telegraph that a steam vessel should 
be ready at Toulon to convey his despatches to Alexandria. 

Upon my calling M. Guizot’s attention to the passage in your Lordship’s 
despatch to which I have above referred, and on my expressing my conviction 
that the French Government could not expect, that if Mehemet Ali persisted in 
his rebellion, the Sultan would be content to abandon his right to the sovereignty 
of Egypt, and take no measures for the restoration of the Turkish fleet, his 
Excellency fully acknowledged the embarrassment of that situation, but merely 
added, ‘‘ Alors comme alors,” meaning, that it will be time enough when such 
embarrassment shall arise, to consider of the measures which it may be then 
expedient to adopt. The French Government, however, will make every effort 
to induce Mehemet Ali to avail himself of the communication which Sir Robert 
Stopford is now instructed to make to him, and have no doubt of their success, 
if St. Jean d’Acre shall have fallen, or is likely very soon to fall, into the hands 
of the Allied Powers. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) GRANVILLE. 


F 2 


36 
No. 48. 
Viscount Palmerston to Earl Granville. 


My Lord, | Foreign Office, November 24, 1840. 


I HAVE to state to your Excellency, that I have been informed upon good 
authority, that among the communications received at the Foreign Office in 
Paris from Alexandria, dated the 1st instant, there was one from Count Walewski, 
stating, that the Egyptians were everywhere greatly dispirited by the successes 
of the Allies in Syria; and that Mehemet Ali himself was so disheartened, 
that Count Walewski had had the greatest difficulty in the world to prevent 
him from yielding to the conditions offered by the a and ee Four Powers. 

am 


? C., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 49. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Paimerston.—(Received November 29.) 


My Lord, Therapia, November 8, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to inclose copy of a note I received this day from 
his Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs, and my answer to his Excellency. 
The subject is the prolongation of the term within which, by the orders of 
the Sublime Porte, the blockade of Alexandria, &c., was directed to commence. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 49. 
Rechid Pasha to Viscount Ponsonby. 


Monsieur |’Ambassadeur, Sublime Porte, le 7 Novembre, 1840. 


LA Sublime Porte a été informée que par suite d’une communication faite 
d’ordre de M. l’Amiral Stopford au commerce d’Alexandrie, par M. le Capitaine 
Fisher, commandant le vaisseau de Sa Majesté Britannique, “‘l’Asia,” la mise a 
exécution du blocus de ce port aurait été ajournée au 20 Novembre. 

La Sublime Porte n’a recu information que par voie indirecte, et en la 
portant a votre connaissance, M. l’Ambassadeur, je désirerais obtenir de votre 
Excellence quelque explication au sujet de la mesure qui en est l’objet. Cette 
mesure, si elle a eu véritablement lieu, doit sans doute avoir été motivée par des 
raisons puissantes ; mais la Sublime Porte les ignore complétement jusqu’a ce 
jour. 

Recevez, &c., 
(Signé) RECHID. 


(Translation. ) 


Rechid Pasha to Viscount Ponsonby. 
Monsieur |’? Ambassadeur, Sublime Porte, November 7, 1840. 


THE Sublime Porte has been informed, that in consequence of a com- 
munication made by order of Admiral Stopford to the merchants of Alexandria, 
by Captain Fisher, commanding Her Majesty’s ship “ Asia,” the enforcement of 
the blockade of that port was to be deferred until the 20th of November. 

_ The Sublime Porte has only indirectly obtained the information; and in 
bringing it to your knowledge, M. Ambassadeur, I would wish to obtain 
some explanation from your Excellency respecting the measure therein 
referred to. This measure, if it has really taken place, must doubtless have 
been founded on weighty reasons; but the Sublime Porte up to this day is 
wholly ignorant of them. 

Receive, &c., 
(Signed) RECHID. 


37 


Inclosure 2 in No. 49. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Rechid Pasha. 


Therapia, November 8, 1840. 


IN reply to the Note dated the 7th instant, which Lord Ponsonby hag just 
had the honour to receive from his Excellency Rechid Pasha, &c., requesting 
information upon the subject of Admiral Stopford’s having ordered Captain 
Fisher, of Her Majesty’s ship “ Asia,” to inform the commercial body in 
Alexandria, that the commencement of the blockade was delayed till the 20th of 
November ; Lord Ponsonby regrets that he is unable to give his Excellency 
any information whatever, as the Sublime Porte is already acquainted, through 
the indirect channels alluded to by his Excellency, with all Lord Ponsonby 
knows upon the subject. 


No. 50. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 29.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, November 8, 1840. 


THE inclosed paper, entitled ‘‘ Considérations,’’ &c., was sent to me for 
my opinion upon the advice given therein to the Sublime Porte with respect to 
Candia. I gave my approbation to it, with the exception of the proposed grant 
for life of the Pashalic. Her Majesty’s Government have always most justly 
attached great value to the possession of Candia by the Sublime Porte. . 

I have recommended the strict execution of the Hatti Sheriff of Gulhané 
in the island. 


Inclosure in No. 50. 


Considérations sur ’ Administration future de l’ Ile de Candie. 


(Extrait.) Le 4 Novembre, 1840. 
LA Convention du 15 Juillet ayant retiré 4 Méhémet Ali l’administration 


de I’Ile de Candie, la Porte se trouve ainsi appelée aujourd’hui a porter son 
attention sur les moyens d’établir solidement son autorité dans cette Ile, et je 
nhésite pas a aflirmer que la premiére, la seule condition méme pour s’en assurer 
la tranquille possession, réside dans le choix du Gouverneur qu’elle y enverra. 
Candie ne ressemble a aucune autre dépendance de |’Empire Ottoman. 
Géographiquement, cette Ile se trouve placée dans une position exceptionnelle. 
La population, qui est évaluée 4 180,000 habitans, compte 150,000 Grecs et 
30,000 Turcs seulement, les derniers, maitres des forteresses et de la majeure 
partie du plat pays, disposent ainsi des principales ressources matérielles de I’Ile. 
Les Grecs, moins riches, mais plus nombreux et protégés par leurs montagnes, 
n’acceptent qu’avec répugnance la suprématie des Turcs ; aussi n’ont-ils jamais 
laissé é€chapper une occasion pour tacher de s’y soustraire. A ces causes 
naturelles de la rivalité entre ces deux fractions de la nation, il faut ajouter le 
souvenir de la tyrannie que les Turcs ont exercé dans les années précédentes 
sur les habitans Grecs. Nulle part peut-étre, il faut en convenir, les Grecs 
n’ont eu A subir une plus dure oppression. La révolution Grecque vint leur 
offrir VYoccasion de se venger, et ils en profitérent largement; d’horribles 
cruautés signalérent en Candie cette période de malheurs, et elles contribuérent 
4 rendre encore plus profonde Ia haine réciproque de ces nations rivales. 

Mais la révolution Grecque réveilla parmi la population Chrétienne de l’Ie un 
autre sentiment bien plus dangereux pour l’autorité de la Porte: le désir de 
Vindépendance. L/’intervention des Puissances put seule empécher cette Ile de 
se soustraire 4 la domination Ottomane, mais les Grecs, en se résignant aux 


décisions des Cabinets, n’ont pas renoncé 4 l’espoir de s’émanciper un jour de 


—— 


38 


cette domination ; la proximité et les incessantes provocations de la Gréce ne 
contribuent que trop a les raffermir dans cet espoir. i , 

Ce fut premitrement en vue de ce danger que la Porte se décida en 1826, a 
confier la Candie 4 l’administration de Méhémet Ali, et pendant plusieurs annees 
le Pacha fut obligé d’y entretenir une force de 8,000 & 9,000 hommes pour la 
maintenir dans Vobéissance. C’est alors quil y envoya Moustapha Pacha, 
d’abord comme Commandant de la troupe, ensuite comme Gouverneur-Général 
de Ile. Par l’énergie de son administration, Moustapha Pacha parvint a 
comprimer tous les partis. La population Turque, jusqu’a la jouissant d’un 
pouvoir despotique, fut soumis 4 un régime régulier ; et les Grecs, contenus par 
la crainte, et protégés en méme temps contre l’oppression des indigénes 
Musulmans, furent moins disposés d’écouter les instigations de leurs co- 
religionaires de la Gréce. L’Ile put ainsi jouir d’une tranquillité qu’elle n’avait 
pas connue sous les délégués de la Porte. 

Moustapha Pacha, qui jouissait déja, a son arrivée dans I’Ie, d’une fortune 
considérable, y acquit de grandes propriétés, qui augmentérent son influence et 
l’attachement encore davantage du pays. Les richesses lui permettant de se 
passer des extortions, il put donner, lui le premier, l’exemple d’une administra- 
tion équitable, et se concilier ainsi l’affection et la confiance de la population. 
En effet il n’y a qu’une voix a son égard, et tout le monde s’accorde a lui 
reconnaitre les qualités d’un bon Gouverneur. Partisan d’ailleurs déclaré de la 
civilisation, et dépouillé de tout préjugé, il ne se laisse point influencer par des 
antipathies religieuses, ou par les considérations d’un sentiment exclusif. Aussi 
la nouvelle de sa confirmation par la Porte a été accueillie avec transport par 
toute la partie saine de la population ; elle n’a contrarié que ceux qui espéraient 
trouver dans un changement l’occasion d’accomplir leurs projets coupables. 
Mais tout en se montrant disposé 4 faire sa soumission au Sultan, Moustapha 
Pacha a exprimé le désir d’obtenir le gouvernement viager del’Ile. Si lon 
considére cette demande comme une condition imposée par Moustapha Pacha, 
elle paraitra avec raison absurde; mais d’abord ce n’est pas sous ce pomt de 
vue qu'il faut Penvisager. Moustapha Pacha est prét 4 remettre I’[le sur la 
simple injonction du Sultan: il voudrait seulement qu’on ajoutat a la faveur de 
sa confirmation celle de le nommer viagérement, non seulement dans l’intérét 
de son propre avenir, mais encore dans celui de la tranquillité de I’Ie a laquelle 
il doit nécessairement s’intéresser en sa qualité de grand propriétaire. En 
effet s'il ne fit nommé Gouverneur de Candie qu’au méme titre que les autres 
Pachas, c’est 4 dire avec la perspective d’étre remplacé peut-étre un an aprés, 
les esprits momentanément apaisés ne renonceront pas entiérement a l’espoir de 
réaliser plus tard leurs vues intéressées; les Turcs d’un cédté, les Grecs de 
Pautre, se prépareront en silence a profiter du premier changement pour 
renouveler leurs tentatives, et la confiance publique sera toujours en éveil. Si 
au contraire Moustapha Pacha est nommeé 4 vie, les partis, déja habitués a son 
administration, et dominés par l’ascendant qu’il a su prendre sur eux, se 
résigneront au silence, et la Sublime Porte sera ainsi délivrée des embarras et des 
complications qui lui susciteraient de nouvelles intrigues dans I’Ile. L’essentiel 
pour la Porte, c'est d’aviser aux moyens d’assurer son autorité, et de la garantir, 
soit contre les intrigues, soit contre les tentatives extérieures. Si Moustapha 
Pacha peut remplir cette double devoir, pourquoi ne pas lui en faciliter les 
moyens? Assurément on ne craindra pas que l’ambition le porte 4 abuser de la 
concession de la Porte pour concevoir des projets d’indépendance; ce n’est 
pas un Gouverneur de Candie qui pourra jamais espérer devenir un Souverain 
indépendant. II faudrait le supposer fou pour lui préter Pespoir de se main- 
tenir, lui Musulman, maitre d’un pays habité par 150,000 Grecs et par 30,000 
Turcs seulement, sans l’appui de la métropole. Dira-t-on qu’il conservera 
de la sympathie pour son ancien maitre Méhémet Ali? Et qu’importe, pourvu 
qu'il gouverne bien l'Ile? Une autre considération fait désirer qu’on laisse a 
Moustapha Pacha le gouvernement a vie de Candie, c’est de conserver ainsi au 
service un homme qui, par ses lumiéres et ses bonnes qualités, pourra étre un 
auxiliaire utile pour la réforme de la bonne cause. Or, qui peut assurer qu’un 
an apres qu'il aura été nomme Pacha de Candie, on ne lui retire cette place pour 
la donner a quelque favori, si on ne la lui assure pas par une concession viagére ? 
Vu les elemens divers qui caractérisent l'état intérieur de Candie, et la placent 
dans une catégorie spéciale, il est certain, que tout changement d’administration 
dans cette Ile y aménera de grandes perturbations. Alors méme que le Sultan 


39 


ne voudrait pas méme lui accorder explicitement le titre de viager, il faudrait 
toujours que le firman de sa nomination contint quelque assurance qui autorisat 
Moustapha Pacha a espérer que tant qu’il se conduira bien, il conservera sa place. 
Il semble méme important qu’on ne tarde pas a lui faire parvenir ce firman, et a 
demander sa soumission a l’officielle. 


(Translation.) 
(Extract.) November 4, 1840. 


THE Convention of the 15th of July having taken away the government 
of the Island of Candia from Mehemet Ali, the Porte thus finds itself now 
calied upon to direct its attention to the means of firmly establishing its autho- 
rity in that island; and I have no hesitation in asserting that the principal, the 
only chance indeed, of securing toit the tranquil possession of the island, rests 
upon the choice of the Governor who is to be sent there. Candia does not 
bear a resemblance to any other dependency of the Ottoman Empire. Geo- 
graphically, that island is placed in a singular position. The population, which 
is estimated at 180,000 inhabitants, reckons 150,000 Greeks, and 30,000 
Turks only ; the latter, masters of the fortresses and of the greater part of the 
level country, thus have at their disposal the main resources of the island. 
The Greeks, less rich, but more numerous, and protected by their mountains, 
acknowledge with reluctance the supremacy of the Turks; thus they have 
never neglected an opportunity of endeavouring to escape from it. ‘To these 
natural causes of rivalry between these two portions of the nation, must be 
added the remembrance of the tyranny which the Turks exercised in former 
years over the Greek inhabitants. No where, perhaps, it must be admitted, 
have the Greeks had to suffer harder oppression. The Greek revolution 
offered them an opportunity of revenging themselves, and they profited fully 
thereby: that unhappy period was marked by horrible cruelties in Candia, 
and those cruelties contributed to render still deeper the mutual hatred of the 
rival nations. 

But the Greek revolution awakened in the Christian population of the 
island another feeling, still more dangerous to the authority of the Porte—the 
desire for independence. ‘The intervention of the Powers could alone pre- 
vent this island from escaping from the Ottoman dominion; but the Greeks, in 
submitting to the decisions of the Cabinets, did not relinquish the hope of 
emancipating themselves some day from that dominion; the proximity and 
the continual incitement of Greece contribute only too much to strengthen 
them in that hope. 

It was principally with this danger in view that the Porte decided in 
1826, upon intrusting Candia tothe government of Mehemet Ali, and for man 
years the Pasha was obliged to maintain a force there of from 8,000 to 9,000 
men in order to keep it in subjection. It was at that time that he sent 
Mustapha Pasha there, first as Commander of the troops, afterwards as 
Governor-General of the Island. By the vigour of his administration, Mus- 
tapha Pasha succeeded in controling all parties. The Turkish population, up 
to that time enjoying despotic power, was subjected to a regular system of 
government ; and the Greeks, restrained by fear, and at the same time pro- 
tected against the oppression of the native Mussulmans, were less disposed 
‘ to listen to the instigations of their co-religionists in Greece. The island was 
thus enabled to enjoy a tranquillity which it had not known under the dele- 
gates of the Porte. 

Mustapha Pasha, who already possessed on his arrival in the island a 
considerable fortune, purchased large estates there, which increased his influ- 
ence and still more the attachment of the country. Riches enabling him to 
forego exactions, he was able himself to give an example of a just administra- 
tion, and thus to gain the affection and confidence of the people. In fact 
there is but one opinion with respect to him, and all the world agrees in 
recognizing in him the qualities of a good Governor. Moreover, being an 
avowed friend to civilization, and divested of every prejudice, he does not 
allow himself to be in the least influenced by religious antipathies, or by 
views proceeding from an exclusive feeling. Therefore the news of his con- 
firmation by the Porte was received with ecstacy by all the rational part of 


40 


the population ; it only vexed those who hoped to find in a change the oppor- 
tunity of accomplishing their criminal designs, But while he shows himself 
disposed to make his submission to the Sultan, Mustapha Pasha has expressed 
a desire to obtain the government of the island for life. If this demand is 
considered as a condition imposed by Mustapha Pasha, it will with justice 
appear absurd ; but, in the first place, it is not in this point of view that it 
must be considered. Mustapha Pasha is ready to deliver up the island upon the 
simple command of the Sultan: he would only wish that to the favour of his 
confirmation might be added that of his appointment for life, not only for the 
sake of his own prospects, but also for that of the tranquillity of the island in 
which he must necessarily be interested as a large proprietor. In fact, if he were 
only appointed Governor of Candia upon the same footing as the other Pashas, 
that is to say, with the prospect of being removed perhaps a year afterwards, 
the minds of the people, quieted for the moment, will not wholly relinquish 
the hope of carrying into effect at a later moment their interested designs ; 
the Turks on the one hand, the Greeks on the other, will silently prepare to 
take advantage of the first change, in order to renew their attempts, and 
public confidence will be always in alarm. If, on the contrary, Mustapha 
Pasha is appointed for life, the parties, already accustomed to his administra- 
tion and swayed by the ascendancy which he has gained over them, will submit 
in silence, and the Sublime Porte will thus be freed from the embarrassments 
and difficulties which fresh intrigues in the island would bring upon it. The 
chief object of the Porte is, to consider the means of securing its authority, 
and of guaranteeing it both against intrigues and against external attacks. If 
Mustapha Pasha can fulfil this twofold duty, why not facilitate to him the 
means of doing so? Certainly it will not be feared that ambition will lead 
him to take advantage of the concession of the Porte to entertain projects of 
independence ; a Governor of Candia can never hope to become an indepen- 
dent Sovereign. He must be thought mad if he is considered capable of 
hoping to maintain himself, a Mussulman, master of a country inhabited by 
150,000 Greeks and by only 30,000 Turks, without the support of the central 
Government. Will it be said that he will retain sympathy for his former 
master Mehemet Ali? and what does it signify, provided that he governs the 
island well? Another consideration makes it desirable that the government 
of Candia should be left to Mustapha for life; it is, that a man would thus be 
retained in service who, by his experience and his good qualities, can be an use- 
ful assistant towards the reform of the good cause. Besides, who can be sure 
that a year after he has been appointed Pasha of Candia, that place will not be 
taken from him to be given to some favourite, if it is not secured to him by a 
grant for life? Considering the different elements which characterise the 
internal state of Candia, and place it in a special position, it is certain that 
every change of administration in that island will create great troubles. 
Even in the case of the Sultan being unwilling even to grant him explicitly 
the title of tenant for life, it would still be requisite that the firman of his 
nomination should contain some assurance which should authorise Mustapha 
Pasha to hope, that so long as he shall conduct himself well, he shall preserve 
his place. It even appears important that this firman should be transmitted 
to him without delays and that his submission should be officially demanded. 


No.5: 
Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, November 80, 1840. 

WITH reference to your despatch of the 8th instant, I have to acquaint 
your Excellency that Her Majesty’s Government consider you to have acted 
quite right, in advising the Porte not to make Mustapha Pasha Governor of 
Candia for life. It is wholly unnecessary for the Sultan to do so; and by doing 
so he might create to himself much future embarrassment. 

The Turkish Government, however, ought to take great care that the 
Candotes, and especially the Greek portion of them, are governed with equity 


41 


and kindness, and have no just cause of complaint ; but the Sultan should also 
keep in the fortresses in Candia officers and troops, upon whom he can entirely 
depend. 
I am, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 52. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 29.) 
(Extract.) ; Therapia, November 8, 1840. 


THE inclosed copy of a letter was given me, and is believed to be worthy 
of credit. 


Inclosure in No. 52. 


Alexandrie, le 27 Octobre, 1840. 


RIEN de nouveau s’est passé pendant cette décade: nous n’avons eu de 
Syrie l’arrivée d’aucune vapeur. M. Boufort est revenu, voie de terre, de son 
voyage de Syrie: ses fatigues ont été tellement grandes qu’il vient d’étre obligé 
de garder le lit, étant attaque d’une fiévre cérébrale. La position d’Ibrahim 
Pacha, qu’il a vue de ses propres yeux, lui a donné un coup terrible, a lui qui 
croyait Ibrahim Pacha invincible, méme pour les Europeens. Nous avons appris 
a Alexandrie le départ de Emir Béchir et de sa famille pour Malte; cela a paru 
satisfaire Son Altesse. Par la méme occasion le Capitaine Fisher a declaré que 
jusqu’au 20 Novembre les batimens neutres en lest pourraient entrer et sortir 
chargés; que c’est l’Amiral Stopford qui avait voulu favoriser le, commerce ; 
que passé ce terme le blocus le plus rigoureux existerait. 

La méme embarcation Anglaise qui a apporte la nouvelle du départ de 
VYEmir Bechir pour Malte, a apporté 4 un négociant Anglais une lettre du 
Commandant Fisher, dans laquelle il le chargeait au nom de l’Amiral Stopford 
de ne pas s’adresser 4 Constantinople pour arranger ses affaires, vu que 1a 
étaient ses ennemis, mais de se soumettre 4 la générosité de l’Angleterre, lui 
déclarant que s’il faisait cette démarche ses affaires s’arrangeraient a son trés- 
grand avantage. 

Son Altesse aurait, dit-on, répondu qu’il connaissait la puissance de 
l’Angleterre ; qu’il savait aussi que cette nation, qu’il avait toujours protégée plus 
que la France, et cela injustement, avait été la premiére 4 tourner ses armes 
contre lui; qu’il avait choisi la France pour médiatrice ; que ces deux Puissances 
étaient voisines; qu’elles pouvaient s’entendre entre elles, mais que lui ne 
ferait jamais que ce que voudrait la France. Ayant complétement échoué, lon 
a voulu employer l’influence de Boghos Bey, et de M. Anastasi, qui avait regu 
une lettre du Comte Medem dans laquelle il lengageait 4 appuyer cette 
démarche. Quand ces deux personnages se sont présentés 4 Son Altesse pour lui 
parler du méme sujet, Son Altesse Jes a repoussés avec indignation, disant qu’il 
n’aurait jamais cru que des gens qui se disaient étre ses amis pourraient lui 
faire une aussi indigne proposition. Le soir le Consul de France étant allé au 
palais, Son Altesse lui a tout raconté, disant que ces messieurs cherchaient a le 
détacher de la France. Le méme jour (le 24 Octobre) est entré dans le port le 
‘““Méteor,” portant de grandes nouvelles pour le Pacha; d’abord la réponse de 
M. Thiers au Mémorandum de Lord Palmerston, plus l’ultimatum adressé aux 
Cing Puissances. Dans cet ultimatum il serait notifié 4 la Sublime Porte la 
révocation de la déchéance de Méhémet Ali, et la déclaration a toutes les Puissances 
que la France prend sous sa protection Méhémet Ali, et lui garantit ses droits. 
Quand Son Altesse a eu cette nouvelle, le sang de contentement est monté au 
visage de Méhémet Ali; au moment, on acraint pour ses jours. _ 

La population est résignée 4 tout événement : l’on viendrait lui annoncer le 
bombardement d’Alexandrie, qu’on ne serait pas étonné. Le Nil est toujours a 
vingt-trois pieds ; pour peu que l’hiver soit rigoureux la Basse Egypte ne pourra 


42 


pas ensemencer les blés. Le Pacha continue 4 exiger les droits de terres encore 
inondées: la misére est A son comble; Alexandrie est obligé de renvoyer des 
grains dans l’intérieur; le peu de villages qui reste, meurt de faim, leur grain 
ayant été emporté par l’eau de Nil. 

L’on assure que les Anglais ont renoncé au bombardement de St. Jean 
d’Acre. M. le Comte Walewski est toujours a Alexandrie 3 il atrés-souvent des 
conférences avec le Pacha, qui l’a pris en trés-grande amitié. 

Le grand vapeur Anglais de la correspondance des Indes est devant le 
port, et attend la malle des Indes, qui ne viendra pas 4 ce qu’on pense. 

Le Commandant Fisher a recu hier le bateau 4 vapeur le ‘‘ Vesuvius,” qu’il 
avait demandé, pour s’en servir pour parlement 4l’entrée du port lorsque le 
cas l’exigeait. 


(Translation.) 


Alexandria, October 27, 1840. 


NOTHING new has happened during the last ten days; no steam-vessel 
has arrived from Syria. M. Boufort has returned by land from his journey 
to Syria: his fatigues were so great, that he has been obliged to keep his 
bed, being attacked with a brain fever. The situation of [brahim Pasha, 
which he witnessed with his own eyes, gave him, who thought [brahim 
invincible even by Europeans, a terrible blow. We have learnt at Alex- 
andria the departure of the Emir Bechir and his family for Malta; that has 
appeared to be satisfactory to his Highness. By the same opportunity 
Captain Fisher declared, that up to the 20th of November neutral vessels in 
ballast might enter and depart laden: that Admiral Stopford had desired to 
favour commerce; that on the expiration of this term the most rigorous 
blockade would exist. 

The same English vessel which brought the news of the departure of the 
Emir Bechir for Malta, brought to an English merchant a letter from Captain 
Fisher, in which he charged him (Mehemet Ali) in the name of Admiral Stop- 
ford not to apply to Constantinople to settle his affairs, seeing that his enemies 
were there, but to submit himself to the generosity of England, declaring, that 
if he took this step his affairs would be settled to his very great advantage. 

His Highness is said to have answered, that he knew the power of 
England; that he knew also that that nation, which he had always protected 
more than France, and that unjustly, had been the first to turn its arms 
against him; that he had chosen France for mediatrix; that those two 
Powers were neighbours; that they might come to an understanding between 
themselves; but that he would never do anything but what France wished. 
Having completely failed, it was wished to make use of the influence of 
Boghos Bey and of M. Anastasi, who had received a letter from Count 
Medem, in which he requested him to support this step. When these two 
persons presented themselves to his Highness to speak to him on the same 
subject, his Highness repelled them with indignation, saying, that he could 
never have supposed that persons who professed to be his friends could make 
to him so unworthy a proposal. The Consul of France having gone to the 
palace in the evening, his Highness told him everything, saying, that those 
gentlemen were seeking to detach him from France. The same day (the 24th 
of October) the “* Meteor” entered the harbour, bringing great news for the 
Pasha: first, the answer of M. Thiers to Lord Palmerston’s Memorandum, 
then, the ultimatum addressed to the Five Powers. In this ultimatum the 
revocation of the dismissal of Mehemet Ali was, it was said, notified to the 
Porte ; and to all the Powers the declaration, that France takes Mehemet Ali 
under her protection and guarantees to him his rights.) When his Highness 
received this news, a flush of satisfaction appeared on his countenance; at the 
moment apprehensions were felt for his life. 

The populace is resigned to everything that may happen: the bombard- 
ment of Alexandria might be announced to it, and it would not be astonished. 
The Nile continues at twenty-three feet; in case the winter should be severe, 
Lower Egypt will be unable to sow its corn. The Pasha continues to exact the 
duties from lands still inundated; misery is at its height; Alexandria is 
obliged to send grain into the interior ; the few people who remain in the 


43 


villages are dying of hunger, their grain having been carried off by the 
waters of the Nile. 

It is asserted, that the English have abandoned the bombardment of St. 
Jean d’Acre. Count Walewski is still at Alexandria; he has frequently 
conferences with the Pasha, who has conceived a very great friendship for 
him. 

The great English steam-vessel for the Indian correspondence is off the 
port, and the mail from India is expected, which, as some persons think, will 
not arrive. 

Captain Fisher yesterday received under his orders the steam vessel 
** Vesuvius,” which he had applied for, to be employed as a means of commu- 
nication at the entrance of the harbour when the case required it. 


No. 53. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 29.) 


My Lord, Therapia, November 8, 1840. 

I HAVE learnt privately, but with certainty, that the French Embassy 
has assured the Sublime Porte that Her Majesty’s Government have strongly 
disapproved of the deposition of Mehemet Ali. 

I have found an occasion to state to his Excellency Rechid Pasha, that 
your Lordship has fully approved of that measure, and considers it a necessary 
one. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No. 54. 
Extract of a Report from M. Laurin.—(Received from Lord Ponsonby, Nov. 29.) 


Beyrout, le 16 Octobre, 1840. 


VOICI la maniére dont s’exprima l’Emir Béchir sur les plans ultérieurs 
d’Ibrahim Pacha. 

On avait formé le projet d’envahir l’Anatolie avec 30,000 hommes de 
troupes réguliéres et avec autant de Bachi-bozouk, de Hanadi, et de Bédouins. 
Mais Méhémet Ali n’était pas d’accord avec lui-méme sur la date de l’exécution 
de ce plan. Il espérait, d’un cote, un arrangement amiable de son affaire et la 
médiation de la France; il redoutait, de Vautre, l’apparition de l’Armée Russe. 
Plus tard on promit des renforts qui devaient venir d’Egypte. Mais lorsque 
V’insurrection des Maronites efit éclaté, on dut renoncer au projet d’invasion, 
d’autant plus que les chefs de district en Anatolie avec lesquels Méhémet Ali 
- s’était mis en rapport, avaient été pour la plupart destitués et remplacés par des 
personnes inconnues. 

En outre les fonds nécessaires étaient en retard, et les Bachi-bozouk 
demandaient, d’un ton menacant, le payement de leurs arriéres. L’Armée avait 
beaucoup de malades, peu de médecins, et un habillement 4 peine suffisant. 
Encore au commencement de Février l’Armée réguliére était forte de 90,000 
hommes, mais elle a été tellement affaiblie par la désertion et la mortalite, qu’a 
présent il peut 4 peine étre question des deux tiers. Depuis le débarquement 
des Alliés a Djounie les Egyptiens ont perdu au-dela de 17,000 hommes, et un 
nombre égal a celui-ci est prét 4 se débander dés que l’Armée s’avancera 
plus loin. | nage cae 

Ibrahim Pacha a douze régimens de Cavalerie, quatre régimens d'Artillerie, 
et trois régimens d’Infanterie disponibles, et sur lesquels il peut compter. Mais 
ceux-ci ne pourront étre employés que dans la plaine. Le reste de lArmée 
est sédentaire et ne peut bouger sans danger pour la possession de la Syrie. 
C’est ainsi que les 4,000 hommes qui forment la garnison de St. Jean d’Acre, 
les 800 qui sont a Eskalon, et les 1,400 qui se trouvent aux environs de Gaza, 
Jaffa et Kaifa, ne peuvent étre déplaces sans compromettre la sireté de ces 
places. Il en est de méme des pe, es de ‘Tripoli et de Lataquia, 


a = Ss le ee ee ee ee ee 


44 


Dans ces lieux le peuple s’insurgerait aussitdt. La méme chose arriverait si 
on rappelait seulement une partie des 7,000 hommes qui se trouvent actuelle- 
ment 4 Antioche. Killis et Antab, Tarsous, Adana, Marache et Albistan, ne 
comptent que 8,000 hommes qui ont assez a faire pour garder la frontiére et les 
forts de Koulek-boghas et de Beilan. Les garnisons de Homs, Alep, et Hama 
n2 sont fortes que de 6,000 hommes, et Ibrahim Pacha lui-méme en a reconnu 
Vinsuffisance. A Damas il n’y a qu’un régiment d’Artillerie et quatre com- 
pagnies de Baltadjis. Mais entre Balbek et Zahlé, dans le village de Malaca, se 
trouve campé Ibrahim Pacha avec 6,000 hommes et sept pi¢ces de campagne 
derriére un fossé. 

Par conséquent, si les Alliés veulent se borner 4 la guerre de montagne, ils 
n’auront 4 combattre, outre les garnisons, que l’Armée de Malaca. S’ils descendent 
dans la plaine de Balbek, ils y trouveront la Cavalerie, |’Artillerie, et les trois 
régimens d’Infanterie. 

Parmi les troupes mentionnés jusqu’ici on ne comprend pas le 12,000 a 
15,000 hommes cantonnés a Orfa, et que Méhémet Ali a poussés en avant dans 
le but d’atteindre plus t6t Diarbekir, au cas ot il ferait une invasion dans 
) Anatolie. 

L’Emir Béchir pense que cette Armée, composée pour la plupart de troupes 
irréguliéres, pourrait étre, sans inconvénient, retirée, et réunie a la susdite Armée 
de Balbek. Elles présentent alors un effectif de 20,000 a 22,000 hommes. 
Mais on pourrait s’en rendre maitre de la maniére suivante. _ 

D’aprés le plan d’Ibrahim, c’est de Damas que cette Armée doit recevoir ses 
munitions de guerre et de bouche et toutes ses autres ressources. [lle serait 
ruinée dés qu’on lui couperait ses communications avec la dite ville, ce qui peut 
se faire en lancant sur ses derri¢res les Druses du Haouran, de Hasbié, et de 
Rahachié, qui sont préts a s’insurger. 

Ibrahim Pacha ne se battrait alors que pour gagner la grande route de 
Damas 4 Gonetra et St. Jean d’Acre. Il faudrait ne pas larréter, mais le 
poursuivre et.ne lui couper la retraite qu’a Eskalon et Gaza, ou il ne pourrait 
arriver que tres-affaibli. Cette poursuite pourrait étre confiée, en toute streté, 
aux insurgés qu'il s’engageait (l’Emir) 4 organiser et 4 conduire. Les Chefs les 
plus influens du Haouran, de |’Anti-Liban, et de Naplous, lui ont fait, dit-il, les 
propositions les plus acceptables. Il n’a qu’A les sommer de se lever et ils se 
rendront a son appel. 

Pour ce qui regarde les garnisons, elles se soumettront successivement au 
Sultan apres l’expulsion d’[brahim Pacha, et de cette maniére on épargnerait 
beaucoup de sang et de matériel. 

L’Emir n’était pas 4 méme de nous dire si les magasins, &c. se trouvaient 
ou non en bon état. 

Il pensait que Armée était approvisionnée pour quatre mois, mais seulement 
de pain, de féves, et de lentilles. 

C’est a St. Jean d’Acre, continua |’Emir, qu’on a transporté le blé qu’on a 
enlevé, sans le payer, aux paysans de la Judée aussitét aprés la révolte. A 
Damas ily a des dépots de ble considérables, mais pas de bonne qualité. 

L’Armée n’est pas payée et n’a pas d’habits pour la saison qui approche. 
L’esprit dont elle est animée est celui des esclaves ; ce qui les fait rester sous les 
drapeaux, cest la crainte des chatimens corporels et l’impossibilité de s’enfuir. 
Les Chefs de PArmée sont soumis, mais non dévoués a Ibrahim. Les troupes 
sont sur un tres-mauvais pied avec les indigénes. La répugnance est réciproque 
et s’accroit journellement. Une révolte générale va étre la conséquence d’un état 
61 violent. 

_ Dans le cours de la conversation ’Emir me dit aussi ce qui suit. Méhémet 
Ali voulait conquérir la Turquie. _ Ti Paurait pu faire, car Dieu lui avait donné 
bien de moyens. Mais et naurait pu y parvenir que par un régime de justice 
et d ae Or, il s’en est si peu soucié que les Syriens ne se sont jamais 
paki ins nus tuation oe inert me Pin trois ans. Nulle part on ne 
dépouillés a les ie “a ar Pepin lo _ Ele a? a bi plaine clarent 
ensuite de leurs bestiaux; a on 1 i Mies ined bimcsursereh oo eu 

; apres cela on les chassait dans les montagnes. C’est 


de 1a qu’ils menacent maintenant de descendre pour se venger cruellement de 
leurs oppresseurs. 


45 


(Translation.) 


Beyrout, October 16, 1840. 


THIS is the way in which the Emir Bechir expressed himself with 
respect to the ulterior plans of Ibrahim Pasha. 

The plan had been formed of invading Anatolia with 30,000 regular 
troops, and as many Bachi-Bozuks, Hanadi, and. Bedouins. But Mehemet 
Ali was not decided himself as to the time for the execution of this plan. On 
the one hand, he hoped for an amicable arrangement of his business, and the 
mediation of France; on the other hand, he feared the appearance of a 
Russian army. Ata later period, reinforcements from Egypt were promised. 
But when the insurrection of the Maronites broke out, the plan of invasion 
was necessarily abandoned ; the more so, because the Chiefs of districts in 
Anatolia, with whom Mehemet Ali had had an understanding, had for the 
most part been dismissed and replaced by unknown persons. 

Besides, the requisite funds were delayed, and the Bachi-Bozuks 
demanded, in a menacing tone, payment of their arrears. The army had 
many sick, few medical men, and scarcely sufficient clothing. Up to the 
beginning of February the regular army was still 90,000 men strong, but. it 
has been so weakened by desertions and by deaths, that at present there 
cannot be more than two-thirds of that number. Since the disembarka- 
tion of the Allies at Djounie, the Egyptians have lost above 17,000 men, and 
an equal number are ready to disband themselves as soon as the army shall 
advance. i 

Ibrahim Pasha has twelve regiments of cavalry, four regiments of artillery, 
and three regiments of infantry, disposable, and on which he can depend. 
But these can only be employed in the plain. The rest of the army is 
stationary, and cannot stir without risking the possession of Syria. Thus, the 
4,000 men who form the garrison of St. Jean d’Acre, the 800 who are at 
Ascalon, and the 1,400 who are in the neighbourhood of Gaza, Jaffa, and 
Caiffa, cannot be displaced without hazarding the safety of those places. It 
is the same case with the 3,000 men of Tripoli and of Latakia. In those 
places, the people would immediately rise in insurrection. The same thing 
would happen if only a part of the 7,000 men, at present at Antioch, should 
be-recalled. Killis and Aintab, Tarsus, Adana, Marash, and Albistan, do 
not reckon more than 8,000 men, who have enough to do to guard the frontier 
and the forts of Kulek Boghas, and of Beilan. The garrisons of Homs, Aleppo, 
and Hamah, are only 6,000 men strong, and Ibrahim Pasha has himself 
admitted that they are insufficient. At Damascus there are only one regiment 
of artillery and four companies of Baltadgis. But between Balbec and 
Zahlé, at the village of Malaca, Ibrahim Pasha is encamped with 6,000 men 
and seven field-guns behind a ditch. 

Consequently, if the Allies choose to confine themselves to the mountain 
war, they will, besides the garrisons, only have to contend with the army of 
Malaca. If they go down into the plain of Balbec they will find there the 
cavalry, the artillery, and the three regiments of infantry. 

Among the troops hitherto mentioned, are not comprised the from 12,000 
to 15,000 men stationed at Orfa, and whom Mehemet Ali pushed forward 
with the object of sooner reaching Diarbekir in case of his invading Anatolia. 

The Emir Bechir thinks that this army, composed for the most part of 
irregular troops, might, without inconvenience, be withdrawn, and united to 
the aforesaid army of Balbec. They would then offer an effective force of 
from 20,000 to 22,000 men. But it would be possible to gain the mastery 
over them in the following way. . 

According to Ibrahim’s plan, this army should receive from Damascus 
its military stores, its provisions, and all its other equipments. It would be 
ruined as soon as its communications with the said city should be cut off, 
which could be done by throwing on its rear the Druses of the Haouran, of 
Hasbeya, and of Rahachié, who are ready to rise. 

Ibrahim Pasha would then only fight to gain the high road from Damascus 
to Gonetra and St. Jean d’Acre. He ought not to be stopped, but to be 
pursued, and his retreat should not be cut off except at Ascalon and Gaza, 
where he could not arrive otherwise than in a very weak state. This pursuit 


46 


might with perfect safety be confided to the insurgents whom he (the Emir) 
undertook to organize and to lead. The most influential Chiefs of the 
Haouran, of the Anti-Libanus and of Naplous, have, he says, made to him 
the most acceptable offers. He has only to summon them to rise, and they 
will obey his call. 

As regards the garrisons, they will submit im succession to the Sultan 
after the expulsion of Ibrahim Pasha, and in this manner much blood and 
-store would be spared. 

The Emir was not able to tell us whether or no the magazines were in 
good condition. 

He thought that the army was provisioned for four months, but only with 
bread, beans, and lentils. 

They conveyed to St. Jean d’Acre, continued the Emir, the corn which 
they carried off without payment from the peasants of Judza, immediately 
after the revolt. There are considerable stores of corn at Damascus, but not 
of good quality. 

The army is not paid, and has no clothing for the season which is coming 
on. The spirit with which it is animated is that of slaves; the fear of 
corporal punishment, and the impossibility of escaping, cause them to remain 
with their standards. The Chiefs of the army are submissive, but not devoted 
to Ibrahim. The troops are on a very bad footing with the natives. The 
aversion is reciprocal and increases daily. A general revolt will be the conse- 
quence of so violent a state of things. 

In the course of the conversation the Emir also said to me what follows : 
Mehemet Ali was desirous of conquering Turkey. He could have done so, 
for God had given him abundance of means. But he could only have effected 
it by ajust and humane administration. Now, he paid so little attention 
to this, that the Syrians have never been in a more frightful situation than for 
the last three years. There was neither justice, nor protection, nor security, in 
any quarter. The peasants of the plain were plundered by the soldiers and 
by the civil officers, first of their harvest, then of their cattle; after that they 
were driven into the mountains. It is from those mountains that they now 
threaten to descend to take a cruel vengeance on their oppressors. 


No. 55. 


M. Steindl to Baron Sturmer.—(Recewed from Lord Ponsonby, Nov. 29.) 


(Extrait.) Beyrout, le 21 Octobre, 1840. 


CE n’est que hier matin que j’ai recu instruction que votre Excellence 
m’a fait ’honneur de m’adresser en date du 6 de ce mois, et par laquelle elle 
a bien voulu me faire connaitre l’envoi en Syrie et le but de la mission du Pére 
Etienne, Supérieur-Général des Lazaristes. J’en fus informé par M. Laurin 
le jour qu’il s’embarqua sur le bateau 4 vapeur 4 Alexandrie; aussi craignais-je 
qu’il ne gagne le Patriarche des Maronites avant que je puisse m’aboucher 
avec lui. 

Mais 4 mon arrivée devant Djounie, je fus informé du contraire. Le Pére 
Etienne était effectivement arrivé peu de jours avant moi, a bord d’un 
pyroscaphe Francais devant Saida, venant d’Alexandrie pour empécher les 
habitans Catholiques du Mont Liban, par l’influence du clergé, & embrasser la 
cause du Sultan et a s’armer contre Méhémet Ali. M. Laurin avait profité du 
méme pyroscaphe pour en prévenir M. le Baron Bandeira. 

_ Avant que le Pere Etienne eut le temps de descendre & terre, le Pére Leroi, 
Prefet du Couvent des Lazaristes & Antaura sur le Liban, 4 deux heures de 
distance de Djounie, et parent du Pére Etienne, se rendit auprés de celui-ci, 
apres avoir obtenu le consentement de l’Amiral Stopford, qui lui était nécessaire 
comme le Couvent d’Antaura se trouvait en-decd de nos avant-postes. Cette 
permission lui fut accordée par ’Amiral Anglais parceque celui-ci n’ignorait pas 
que le seul conseil que le Pere Leroi pouvait donner au Supérieur-Général, dans 
Vétat ot se trouvaient déja les habitans de la montagne et surtout le clergé 
cae fi fig de cepara sur-le-champ, sans méme mettre pied a terre. 
Mn eltet tous les montagnards qui avaient pu se mettre en communication avec 


notre camp ou nos vaisseaux, étaient déj& venus chercher des armes et des 
munitions. De plus il y a en Syrie différens rites Catholiques indigénes; on 
trouve presque de partout sur le Liban des Maronites, des Melquites (Grecs 
unis), des Syriens, et des Arméniens Catholiques. Le clergé de ces différentes 
peuplades, quoique feignant une parfaite harmonie, nourrit une certaine jalousie 
réciproque qui se manifeste en de certaines occasions ; mais les missionnaires 
étrangers ont éveillé la jalousie commune de tous les prétres indigenes, 
quoique ceux-ci tachent de la déguiser autant qu’ils peuvent; raison pour 
laquelle le Pere Etienne n’aurait guére réussi 4 gagner le clergé et le Patriarche 
Maronite. 

Aussi le Supérieur des Lazaristes ne fut pas sourd aux conseils du Pére 
Préfet, qui, établi depuis plusieurs années dans ce pays, ne pouvait pas ignorer 
toutes ces circonstances; il repartit pour Alexandrie peu de jours aprés son 
arrivée, ne voulant pas perdre son temps et sa peine sans le moindre résultat, 
comme les autres Agens Francais qui parcourent les montagnes et le littoral de 
la Syrie. Le bruit qui s’était répandu que d’autres Lazaristes devaient venir 
pour seconder leur Supérieur, est dénué de fondement. 

Ne sachant pas si votre Excellence a été prévenue d’autre part du mouve- 
ment que se donnent les Emissaires Francais en Syrie pour paralyser les efforts 
des Anglais et soutenir Méhémet Ali, je croirais manquer 4 mon devoir si je 
he portais pas a sa connaissance ce que j’ai appris. 

Ce sont les Consuls de France 4 Damas et a Beyrout, le Comte Ratti- 
Menton et M. Déméloise, qui dirigent les ménées de ces Agens, presque tous 
employés des Consulats de Beyrout et de Damas, Tripoli, Saida, &. M. Dé- 
méloise améme ordinairement un bateau-a-vapeur a sa disposition pour se rendre 
plus facilement d’un point de la cote a l’autre, et qu’il envoya 4 Alexandrie avec 
la nouvelle de la défection de l’Emir Béchir. 

Votre Excellence m’ordonne de la tenir au courant de tout ce qui se passe 
ici, et surtout des mouvemens d’Ibrahim Pacha. J’ai taché de le faire aussi 
bien que j’ai pu dans mon journal, dont j’ai ’honneur de lui soumettre ci-joint la 
quatriéme continuation. 

Ce Général parait avoir perdu tout espoir de pouvoir se tenir dans le Liban 
et garder les villes maritimes de la Syrie. I parait méme craindre d’y laisser 
des corps d’armée, qu'il finirait par perdre l'un aprés l’autre, comme cela lui est 
arrive a Saida, Beyrout, Tsour, et 4 d’autres différentes occasions. C’est pourquoi, 
aprés avoir été battu a Beit-hannis par le Commodore Napier, il prit le parti 
d’évacuer la montagne et les villes maritimes, et de former un corps d’armée 
plus considérable que ceux qui avaient été défaits aux différentes attaques, dans 
un camp retranché 4 Malaca prés de Zahlé, dans la plaine qui sépare le Liban 
de l’Anti-Liban. Il y fit donc venir les débris des troupes battues, quelques 
régimens qui se trouvaient dans le voisinage, et les garnisons de ‘Tripoli, 
Tortose, et Lataquié, tout en se bornant a se tenir sur la défensive. Sous peu de 
jours, et quand ces troupes l’auront rejoint, il se trouvera a la téte d’une armée 
de 10,000 4 12,000 hommes, dont 1,500 de Cavalerie, avec sept picces de canon. 
Ses intentions ne sont pas connues. L’Amiral Stopford pense qu'il pourrait 
tacher, voyant la Syrie perdue pour lui, ce qui met l’Egypte aussi en grand 
danger, de tenter un coup de téte, pour embrouiller les affaires en Europe. 
Sachant que Ja Russie enverrait des troupes en Turquie s’il avancait dans |’Asie 
Mineure, ce que, d’aprés les assertions de M. Pontois, serait considéré par la 
France comme une déclaration de guerre, Ibrahim, qui n’a plus beaucoup a 
perdre et tout 4 gagner, pourrait avancer en Anatolie, ou il ne craint pas de 
rencontrer beaucoup d’obstacles, et ot il compte sur la sympathie de la. 
population Musulmane. L’Amiral Stopford ne put toutefois baser sur rien 
cette supposition. . 

Depuis l’entrée des troupes ‘Turques et Anglaises 4 Beyrout, aussi depuis 
que le Commodore Napier a cédé &@ Sir Charles Smith le commandement des. 
troupes de terre, aucun mouvement ne s’est fait de notre cdté; on n’a pas méme 
songé ni a fortifier Beyrout, comme ont fait 4 Saida le Capitaine Berkeley et le 
Colonel de Lebzeltern, ni méme a envoyer a |’Emir Béchir Kasim, qui se 
trouve avec 5,000 ou 6,000 montagnards, dont beaucoup manquent d’armes, les 
fusils, munitions, et vivres, qu’il réclame journellement ; raison pour laquelle aussi 
cet Emir ne peut s’éloigner de Stammana, ot il se trouve depuis une dixaine de 
jours sans rien faire. MT) 

Izzet Pacha joue de son mieux le role passit qui lui est assigné, sans 


48 


pourtant pouvoir deguiser entiérement son dépit, et tout aussi peu son caractére 
prépotent et féroce, qui lui a attiré la haine de ceux qui furent placés sous ses 
ordres. Les Anglais ne l’aiment pas malgré sa politesse outrée envers eux, et 
les Turcs, malheureux de |’avoir pour Général-en-Chef, le détestent tous, 
quoiqu’il tache, pour ne point se compromettre vis-a-vis des Européens, de les 
traiter de son mieux et de cacher cette cruauté dont bien de personnes sont 
devenues les victimes. Parfois pourtant son caractére se trahit, surtout depuis 
qu’il s’est blessé 4 la jambe. Il est parfois d’une brutalité envers ses sub- 
ordonnés qui s’en plaignent ouvertement: l’autre jour il avait ordonné, en 
contravention avec le Hatti-Chérif, de donner 500 coups de baton 4 son 
cuisinier pour avoir mis trop de sel dans la soupe; un Dragoman de |’Amiral 
Stopford, qui, par bonheur pour cet infortuné, se trouvait présent, intercéda pour 
lui, et obtint sa grace. 

Le vieux Emir Béchir n’est pas encore parti pour Malte; il se trouve 
toujours 4 Saida pour embarquer sa famille. Je pense que le Consul-Général, 
ainsi que M. l’Amiral Bandeira, auront informé votre Excellence de tout ce qui 
regarde ce vieillard presqu’ octogénaire, qui a puissamment contribué dans 
ses derniéres années au malheur de la nation dont il était le Prince. 


(Translation.) 
(Extract.) Beyrout, October 21, 1840. 


I ONLY received yesterday morning the instruction which your Excel- 
lency did me the honour to address to me on the 6th of this month, and by 
which you had the goodness to apprize me of the mission to Syria of the 
Pére Etienne, General-Superior of the Lazarists, and of the object of it. 
I was informed of it by M. Laurin, the day on which he embarked in the 
steam-vessel at Alexandria ; I was consequently apprehensive lest he should 
gain over the Patriarch of the Maronites, before I could manage to communi- 
cate with him. 

But on my arrival before Djounie, I was informed the contrary. The 
Pere Etienne had indeed arrived off Saida a few days before me, on board a 
French steam-vessel coming from Alexandria, in order to prevent the Catholic 
inhabitants of Mount Lebanon, by the influence of the Clergy, from embrac- 
ing the cause of the Sultan and taking arms against Mehemet Ali. M. Laurin 
had taken advantage of the same steam-vessel to apprize Baron Bandeira 
of the fact. 

Before the Pére Etienne had time to land, the Pére Leroi, Prefect of the 
Convent of the Lazarists at Antaura on the Lebanon, two hours’ distance 
from Djounie, and a relation of the Pére Etienne, visited the latter, having 
first obtained the consent of Admiral Stopford, which was necessary to him, 
as the Convent of Antaura was within our advanced posts. This permission 
was granted to him by the English Admiral, because the latter was not 
ignorant that the only advice which the Pére Leroi could give to the General- 
Superior, in the state in which the inhabitants of the mountain, and especially 
the clergy, already were, was to return forthwith without putting his foot on 
shore. In fact, all the mountaineers who had been able to place themselves 
In communication with our camp or our vessels, had already come for arms 
and ammunition. Moreover, there are in Syria. different native Catholic 
sects; all over the Lebanon there are Maronites, Melchites, (United Greeks,) 
Syrian and Armenian Catholics. The clergy of these different people, although 
feigning entire harmony, cherish a certain reciprocal jealousy which shows 
itself on certain occasions; but the foreign missionaries have roused the com- 
mon jealousy of all the native priests, although the latter endeavour to discuise 
it as much as they can; for which reason the Pére Etienne would searcely 
have succeeded in gaining over the clergy and the Maronite Patriarch. 

Accordingly, the Superior of the Lazarists was not deaf to the advice of 
the Pere Prefect, who, being settled for several years in this country, could 
not be ignorant of all these circumstances ; he set out again for Alexandria a 
few days after his arrival, being unwilling to lose his time and his trouble 
without the least result, as the other French Agents who traverse the moun- 
tains and the sea-coast of Syria. The report which was spread t} 


ends: rt wi nat other 
azarists were to come to support their Superior, is destitute of foundation. 


49 


Being ignorant whether your Excellency has, on the other hand, been 
made acquainted with the movements of the French emissaries in Syria, in 
order to paralyze the efforts of the English, and support Mehemet Ali, I 
should think myself wanting in my duty if I did not bring to your knowledge 
what I have learnt. 

The French Consuls at Damascus and at Beyrout, the Count Ratti-Menton 
and M. Démeéloise, direct the proceedings of these Agents, who are almost all 
employed in the Consulates of Beyrout, Damascus, Tripoli, and Saida, &c. 
M. Deméloise likewise has generally a steam-vessel at his disposal, in order 
that he may go with greater facility from one point of the coast to the other, 
and which he sent to Alexandria with the news of the defection of the Emir 
Bechir. 

Your Excellency directs me to keep you informed of all that passes in 
this quarter, and especially of the movements of Ibrahim Pasha. I have 
endeavoured to do so as well as I could in my journal, the fourth part of which 
IT have the honour to submit to you herewith. 

That General appears to have lost all hope of being able to maintain 
himself in the Lebanon and to keep the maritime towns of Syria. He 
appears even to be fearful of leaving there the divisions of the army, which he 
would end by losing one after the other, as happened to him at Saida, 
Beyrout, Tsour, and on various other occasions. It is for this reason that, after 
having been defeated by Commodore Napier at Beit-Hannis, he took the course 
of evacuating the mountain and the maritime towns, and of concentrating a 
more considerable force than those which had been defeated in the different 
attacks, in an entrenched camp at Malaca near Zahlé, in the plain which 
separates the Lebanon from the Anti-Lebanon. He moved upon that point 
the remains of the defeated troops, some regiments which were in the 
neighbourhood, and the garrisons of Tripoli, Tortosa, and Latakia, at the same 
time that he confined himself to the defensive. In a few days, and when 
these troops shall have joined him, he will be at the head of an army of from 
10 to 12,000 men, of whom 1,500 will be cavalry, with seven guns. His 
intentions are not known. Admiral Stopford thinks that he might attempt, 
seeing that Syria is lost to him, whereby Egypt also is placed in great danger, 
to undertake a desperate deed, in order to embroil the affairs of Europe. 
Knowing that Russia would send troops into Turkey if he advanced into Asia 
Minor, which, according to the assertions of M.de Pontois, would be con- 
sidered by France as a declaration of war, Ibrahim, who has no longer much to 
lose and everything to gain, might advance into Anatolia, where he is not appre- 
hensive of meeting with many obstacles, and where he reckons upon the 
sympathy of the Mussulman population. Admiral Stopford, has, however, 
no foundation for this supposition. 

Since the entrance of the Turkish and English troops into Beyrout, 
since also Commodore Napier has given up to Sir Charles Smith the command 
of the land forces, no movement has been made on our side; they have not 
even thought of fortifying Beyrout, as Captain Berkeley and Colonel de 
Lebzeltern have done at Saida, or even of sending to the Emir Bechir Kasim, 
who has with him 5,000, or 6,000 mountaineers, many of whom are in want 
of arms, the muskets, ammunitions, and provisions which he daily applies for; 
for which reason likewise that Emir also cannot remove from Stammana, 
where he has been for the last ten days doing nothing. 

Izzet Pasha plays to the best of his ability the passive part assigned to 
him, without, however, being entirely able to conceal his disgust, and as little 
his overbearing and savage character, which has brought down upon him the 
hatred of those who were placed under his orders. The English do not like 
him, notwithstanding his excessive politeness towards them, and the Turks, 
unhappy at having him for their Chief, all detest him, although he endeavours, 
in order not to compromise himself with regard to the Europeans, to treat them 
as he best can, and to conceal that cruelty of which many persons have been 
the victims. At times, however, his character betrays itself, especially. since he 
was wounded in the leg. He acts at times brutally towards his subordinates, 
who openly complain of it: the other day he had ordered, in violation of the 
Hatti Sheriff, 500 blows to be given i cook for having put too much salt 


7 ee nee aye ee! a ON 
. , 7 . 
* 


EE —— Cte Al ~ t a Lee Pe iP ee rt ABP ered Phi bride SM At pis 


50 


into the soup; one of Admiral Stopford’s interpreters, who, fortunately for 
the wretch, was present, interceded for him, and obtained his pardon. 

The old Emir Bechir has not yet set out for Malta; he is still at Saida 
in order to embark his family. I suppose that the Consul-General, as well as 
Admiral Bandeira, will have informed your Excellency of all that relates to 
this old man, now nearly eighty, who has powerfully contributed in his latter 
years to the misfortunes of the nation of which he was the Prince. 


EEE aaa, 


No. 56. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 29.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, November 8, 1840. 


I HAVE this evening received the inclosed Report from Mr. 
Wood. | 


P.S.—I likewise inclose a Report I received from Sir Charles Smith 
as an inclosure in one of his letters, which your Lordship may think worth 
reading. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 56. 
Mr. Wood to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Beyrout, October 29, 1840. 


THE evacuation of Tripoli, on the 18th instant, has been followed by 
that of Tortosa, Latakia, and Antioch ; the same is reported of Beilan and 
Scanderoun, and Kourk-Kolak. 

The Governor of Tripoli has joined the Sultan’s standard, and 
Mohammed Bey, the commanding officer of the garrison, has been seized 
by the mountaineers of Akkar. They have also made a great number of 
prisoners, and have dispersed the remainder of his troops. Many of the 
oe that evacuated Latakia have deserted and returned to the 

ultan. 

Ibrahim Pasha is withdrawing his forces rapidly from the frontiers of 
Asia Minor, according to the report of the Emir Bechir. 

Though not anything positive is known with regard to Aleppo, yet it 
is rumoured that the people have shut the gates of the town against the 
Egyptian troops, and occupy it in the name of the Sultan. 

Sheik Said of Beled Safet to the south has come to me to Beyrout 
and I presented him to his Excellency Izzet Pasha, who gave him 2 
Boyourouldi to return to his district, and collect the Sheiks of Beshara 
Souf, Gebel Nablous, Gebel el Kods, and endeavour to cut off the commu- 
nication between Ibrahim Pasha’s camp and Acre, which has been done. 
I could not procure for Sheik Said more than 800 muskets, but the 
moment arms arrive, either from Malta or Constantinople, he is to be 
furnished with a sufficient number to enable him to close on the left flank 
of Ibrahim’s army, assisted by the Druses of Hasbeya and Raskeya, who 
had unanimously declared in favour of the Sultan previous even to their 
being provided with arms. 

Some time since I addressed a circular letter to the Sheiks of the 
Haouran and el Ledjea, and on the 25th instant twenty-seven of them 
accompanied by 200 horsemen, came personally to make their sub- 
mission. 

They were well received; robes of honour were given to th 
they have left yesterday for their homes with fenestrae to hee a 
rear of the Egyptians. 

The people of the Haouran have already intercepted two convoys, and 
are carrying on their operations to within a short distance of Damascus. 


51 


The mountaineers of Akkar and Sappita to the north of Tripoli, with 
the Emir Hangiar, will take possession of the road and bridge of Homs 
and Hamah, and so separate the army of the north from that of the south, 
the moment we can provide them with 4,000 stand of arms. 

I hope, therefore, that in a few days they will have the means of 
annoying and occupying the right flank of Ibrahim, by which he will be 
completely hemmed in and surrounded. 

I feel confident that the moment Sir C. Smith thinks fit to advance 
on his front with the Emir Bechir, the natives who are on his rear and 
flanks will be encouraged to fall or close upon him, when, if the Turkish 
troops display the same firmness they have shown hitherto, he must either 
capitulate with his whole army, or be cut to pieces. 

If advantage be taken of the enthusiastic feeling of the natives at this 
moment, and of the panic of the Egyptians, the campaign in Syria ought 
to terminate in a fortnight hence ; if not, the winter may materially change 
and retard our chances of success. 

The French are indefatigable in their intrigues, and endeavour to 
persuade the Syrians that they are going to war with us in the spring. 

Though I hear nothing more of the proposal to Mehemet Ali for 
their occupation of Acre, yet I am told positively that the last French 
steamer disembarked at that place four French engineer officers. 

To prevent similar occurrences, as also the constant communication 
of French steamers of war with the coast, coming from Alexandria, I have 
proposed re-establishing the quarantine, which suggestion having been 
acceded to, all vessels and passengers coming from Egypt will have to 
perform ten days’ quarantine at Beyrout. 

An ‘ Ordre du Jour” will be also published to-morrow based on the 
one issued by Solyman Pasha, to which the French, I believe, did not 
then object, condemning to death all who encourage the Sultan’s subjects 
to continue in their disobedience in any manner whatever. I hope it will 
have the effect of deterring the French emissaries from persevering in 
their machinations. 

The Maronite patriarch has invited Mr. Steindl and myself to go to 
him to-morrow to receive the documents relative to the rights of the 
Maronite clergy and nation. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) RICHARD WOOD. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 56. 


LE bateau-d-vapeur Francais qui est arrivé hier, 4 son départ de la France 
est allé A Constantinople, de 1a il est allé 4 Alexandrie, et de cette derniére 
ville il a pris des dépéches, et il est arrivé & St. Jean d’Acre. Apres son arrivée 
on a destitué et mis en prison le Gouverneur Heuman Bey, et il a été remplacé 
par Mabmoud Bey, ex-Gouverneur de Beyrout. Ensuite le bateau est allé a 
Jaffa, d’ot le Commandant du bateau est allé 4 Jerusalem, et le Gouverneur 
de cette place a été destitué également et mis en prison. Aprés cela le bateau 
est parti de Jaffa, et il a touché 4 Sidon et Beyrout, d’ou il s’est dirigé a 
Tripoli, et 4 son retour il doit toucher de nouveau a Beyrout, et aprés cela il 
doit se rendre 4 Acre, d’ot il prendra des dépéches, et il ira a Alexandrie, et de 
la il partira pour France. Ce bateau & son départ de la France avait 4 son 
bord le nommé Monfor, lequel, aprés avoir fait tout le susdit trajet avec le meme 
bateau, a été débarqué a Beyrout. : 

Le nommé Nicolas Portalis, habitant de Beyrout, est un agent d’[brahim 
Pacha; celui-ci, ayant une fabrique de soie dans le village nommé Bétere, qui est 
4 cing lieues d’ici, il y va toujours avec le prétexte de sa fabrique, d’ou il _corres- 
pond avec Ibrahim Pacha, et il sert de canal pour la correspondance d’Ibrahim 
Pacha avec Alexandrie. : 

D’aprés les apparences, les Francais ont l'intention d’occuper une place sur 
la céte de Syrie, et probablement cela sera St. Jean d’Acre, et ils débarqueront 
des troupes avec le consentement de Méhémet Ali. | 

Octobre 24, 1840. 
3 H 2 


Jat ak ees ee ee 


52 


(Translation.) 


THE French steam-boat which arrived yesterday, went from France to Con- 
stantinople, from thence to Alexandria, and took despatches from the latter city, 
and arrived at St. Jeand’Acre. After its arrival, the Governor, Heuman Bey, 
was deposed, and put into prison, and he was succeeded by Mahmoud Bey, Ex- 
Governor of Beyrout. The boat then proceeded to Jaffa, from whence the 
Commander of the boat went to Jerusalem, and the Governor of that place was 
likewise deposed and put into prison. After this, the boat left Jaffa, and touched 
at Sidon and Beyrout, from whence it proceeded to Tripoli, and on its return, it 
is to touch again at Beyrout, and then it is to proceed to Acre, from whence it 
will take despatches, and proceed to Alexandria, and from thence it will take its 
departure for France. This boat, on its departure from France, had on board a 
person named Monfor, who, after having made the whole of the above-mentioned 
voyage in the same boat, disembarked at Beyrout. 

A person named Nicholas Portalis, an inhabitant of Beyrout, is an agent of 
Ibrahim Pasha; this person, who has a silk manufactory in the village of Betera, 
which is five leagues distant from hence, goes there continually under the pretence 
of going to his manufactory, from whence he corresponds with Ibrahim Pasha, 
and he serves as the channel for the correspondence of Ibrahim Pasha with 
Alexandria. 

According to appearances, the French intend to occupy a place on the coast 
of Syria, and this will probably be St. Jean d’Acre, and they will disembark 
troops with the consent of Mehemet Ali. 

October 24, 1340. 


No. 57. 
Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received November 30.) 


My Lord, Paris, November 27, 1840. 


I INCLOSE the “ Moniteur” of yesterday and to-day, which contain 
an accurate report of the two first days’ debate in the Chamber of Deputies 
on the Address. 

The debate was opened by Marshal Soult. He was succeeded by M. 
Thiers, who, in a speech of more than three hours, defended the conduct 
and explained the policy of the Ministry of which he was at the head. 
M. Thiers avowed that it was his intention to augment the regular army 
to the amount of 639,000 men, to put into activity 300,000 National Guards, 
to suspend any explanation with the Allied Powers upon the Affairs of the 
East until the spring, in order to give the time necessary to prepare these 
armaments, to persuade Mehemet Ali to avoid taking measures which 
might prematurely require the interference of France, and then, after this 
completion of the military preparations, to insist not only on the abrogation 
of the Treaty of July 15th, but also on a re-consideration of the Treaties 
of 1815 for the purpose of adopting a new European arrangement, more 
suitable to the interests and glory of the French nation. 'T'wo speeches, 
one by M. Passy and the other by M. Guizot, occupied the whole time of 
the Chamber yesterday. M. Passy spoke three hours in defence of the 
Ministry, of which he was a member; and M. Guizot made an able reply 
to the speech of M. Thiers of the preceding day. 

The official despatches and private letters having reference to the 
Eastern Question, which were read or quoted in the debate of these two 
days, were very numerous. The debate will not terminate before the 
middle of next week, and there will be a majority of more than sixty in 
favour of the Address. I am informed that twelve or thirteen deputies 
belonging to’ the Parti Gauche will, from their love of peace, vote with 
the Government on this occasion. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) GRANVILLE. 


ee 


i. Oh i ee ls ce —_— * © oe ee Se ae ee ee eee ee 


53 


No. 58. 


x 


Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 30.) 


My Lord, Paris, November 27, 1840. 

THE “ Moniteur” of this day contains a telegraphic despatch written 
by the French Consul-General, dated Alexandria, the 11th instant, and 
stating that Ibrahim Pasha had received orders from Mehemet Ali to retire 
with all his troops. 

I have been informed that M. Cochelet, in the same telegraphic 
despatch, communicated to the French Government that Mehemet Ali 
has written a letter to the King of the French, in which he places himself 
entirely at the disposal of His Majesty, and solicits his good offices in 
his favour. 

I have, &c., 


(Signed) | GRANVILLE. 


No. 59. 


Mr. Bloomfield to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received December 1.) 


My Lord, St. Petersburgh, November 17, 1840. 

YOUR Lordship’s despatches to the 3rd of November were delivered 
to me by the messenger Barnard on the 14th instant. 

In obedience to the instructions contained in your despatch of that 
day, I have delivered to Count Nesselrode copies of your Lordship’s des- 
patch to Earl Granville, of the 2nd of November, and of the despatch 
therein referred to, addressed by M. Thiers to M. Guizot on the 8th of 
October. 

Count Nesselrode appears highly to approve of your Lordship’s 
despatch, and assured me that nothing could be more satisfactory to him 
than the tenor of all your late communications to the French 
Government. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) J. A. D. BLOOMFIELD. 


No. 60. 
Mr. Bloomfield to Viscount Palmerston.— (Received December 1.) 


(Extract.) St. Petersburgh, November 17, 1840. 

COUNT NESSELRODE appears satisfied with the speech of the King of 
the French at the opening of the Chambers, and also with the last news from 
Paris. 

His Excellency has heard from Vienna, that the doubts entertained by 
Prince Metternich as to the result of the operations on the coast of Syria had 
subsided. 

I inquired whether the late communications from Prussia and Austria had 
made any impression on the policy of the Imperial Cabinet, and was informed 
by Count Nesselrode, that he had not felt himself called upon to alter the 
general instructions to Baron Brunnow, which were, not to deviate from the 
limits of the Convention of July, but also not to oppose any reasonable 
overture from France. 

The Prussian Minister and Austrian Chargé d’Affaires have urged the 
necessity of the Allies adopting some measure which would allow France to 
become a party to the final settlement of the Turco-Egyptian Question ; as, 
without her accession and acknowledgment of the arrangement, whatever it 


Ty Le) Onn ce oe ae " 
my itil ee ” 


54 


might be, the work could not be complete; and that it was imperative on the 
Four Powers to consider beforehand what course they ought to adopt, under 
the Mae changes that might arise during the contest now carrying on in 
the Kast. 

Count Nesselrode appears not to have thought it necessary to meet their 
wishes in giving any special instructions on these points. 

The Constantinople post bas been due several days, and our last direct 
news from Syria is only up to the 14th October. 

Count Nesselrode’s messenger to London will be despatched on the arrival 
of the Turkish post. 


No. 61. 
Viscount Palmerston to Mr. Bloomfield. 


Sir, Foreign Office, December 2, 1840. 


I HAVE received your despatch of November 17, in which you state that 
the Prussian Minister and Austrian Chargé d’Affaires had recommended that 
the Allies should adopt some measure which would allow France to become a 
party to the final settlement of the Turco-Egyptian Question. 

I have to state to you, that it would seem that the execution of that part of 
the Treaty of 15th July, which relates to the arrangements to be made between 
the Sultan and Mehemet Ali, will be completed whenever those arrangements 
shall have been agreed to by both parties by the aid of the Four Powers; but it 
is difficult to see in what way France could now come in as a party to the 
settlement of those arrangements. For France declined to take an active part 
in the Alliance as a supporter of the Sultan; and in the recent debates in the 
French Chambers it has been openly avowed that France is the supporter of 
Mehemet Ali. If then, France were now to come into conference with the 
other Four Powers, for the purpose of settling the details of the final arrange- 
ment between the Sultan and Mehemet Ali, she would come into that Confer- 
ence as the avowed protector of Mehemet Ali, and would thus bring into the 
Conference an element of discord instead of the means of conciliation. 

No such distinct proposition, however, as that mentioned in your despatch 
as having been made to Count Nesselrode, has been yet made to Her Majesty’s 
Government. 


Iam, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 62. 
Lord William Russell to Viscount Palmerston.— (Received December 1.) 


(Extract.) Berlin, November 25, 1840. 


BARON WERTHER has just communicated to the King the news of 
the taking of St. Jean d’Acre, which has given His Majesty the greatest 
pleasure. 


at) 


No. 63. 


Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received December 2.) 


My Lord, Paris, November 30, 1840. 

I APPRIZED your Lordship, in my despatch of Friday last, that I had 
been informed that the whole of the telegraphic despatch, containing intelli- 
gence of the orders given to Ibrahim Pasha to return with his army from 
Syria, had not been published in the ‘‘Moniteur,” and that the unpublished 
part of it stated that a letter had been addressed by Mehemet Ali to the King 
of the French, placing himself at the disposal of His Majesty, and soliciting His 
Majesty’s intervention in his behalf with the Sultan and the Allies of the Porte. 
This letter of Mehemet Ali has been received, but the only answer given to 
it, will be a reference to the advice which M. Cochelet was instructed to press 
upon Mehemet Ali, to accede to the conditions which Sir Robert Stopford has 
been authorized to offer. 

I have, &c., 

(Signed) GRANVILLE. 


No. 64. 


Earl Granvitle to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received December 7.) 


My Lord, Paris, December 4, 1840. 


THE general discussion on the Address in the Chamber of Deputies 
terminated yesterday. It lasted eight days. The ‘‘ Moniteurs” which I 
transmit to your Lordship, contain an accurate report of the speeches which 
have been delivered. ‘Those of M. Guizot, of M. Thiers, of M. Berryer, of 
M. Lamartine, of M. Villemain, of M. Jaubert, and M. Teste, are the most 
worthy your Lordship’s perusal. 

The speeches of M. Thiers and of M. Jaubert, late Minister of Public 
Works, are remarkable for the disclosure of the views and projects of the late 
Ministry. M. Thiers avowed that the object of the immense armaments which 
it was his intention to have proposed had he remained in office, was not only to 
force a retractation by the Allied Powers of the stipulations of the Treaty of 
July, but also a revision of the settlement of Europe, as established by the 
Treaties of 1815. M. Jaubert declared that he waited with impatience for the 
day of vengeance against England, and in his violent anger, he let out the 
secret, to the great annoyance of his former Colleagues, that one of the objects 
of the recall of the French fleet to Toulon, was to seize the Balearic Islands. 
M. Guizot spoke with great ability, with firmness, and moderation; and 
Marshal Soult, when attacked yesterday in the Chambers for writing a civil 
private letter to an English gentleman, in which he expressed his hope for the 
continuance of the alliance between England and France, notwithstanding the 
disagreement upon the Eastern Question, answered the attack by referring to 
the cordial reception he had experienced from the people of England when 
Ambassador at the coronation of Her Majesty, and said he would repeat now 
what he had declared at that time, that his wish was for the perpetuity of the 
alliance between the two countries, as the best guarantee for the peace of 
the world. 

The debate on the paragraphs of the Address will probably be closed 
to-morrow. ‘The Commission of the Chambers has itself altered the second 
and third paragraphs, and they have adopted language stronger than they 
originally proposed respecting the determination of France to watch over the 
maintenance of the balance of power in Europe, and not suffer it to be infringed. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) GRANVILLE. 


56 
No. 65. 
Viscount Palmerston to Earl Granville. 


My Lord, | Foreign Office, December 4, 1840. 


HER Majesty’s Government have learnt, with great satisfaction, from your 
Excellency’s despatch of the 30th ultimo, that the French Government has 
given to Mehemet Ali advice which is so well calculated to bring to an early 
and satisfactory conclusion the present troubles in the territories of the Sultan, 
and which does so much credit to the conciliatory spirit of the Cabinet of 
Paris. 

Iam, & 


, &e., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 
EN sa OE gH died RAR SO Ue GB aS Ah i Rt 


No. 66. 


Lord William Russell to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received December 7.) 


My Lord, Berlin, November 30, 1840. 


I HAVE had the honour to receive your Lordship’s despatches to the 24th 
of November. 

I communicated the substance of them to Baron Werther. His Excellency 
approves the course pursued by your Lordship, and looks forward with satisfac- 
tion to a prompt termination of the Oriental Question. 

Baron Werther expressed the hope that no objection would be made to any 
form that would be agreeable to the French Government, and induce them to 
join their efforts to those of the Allies to terminate the differences existing 
between the Pasha of Egypt and the Porte. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) WILLIAM RUSSELL. 


No. 67. 
Colonel Sir Charles F. Smith to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received November 29.) 


My Lord, St. Jean d’ Acre, November 5, 1840. 

ON the 29th ultimo, it was finally determined between Sir Robert 
Stopford and myself that the siege of Acre should be undertaken. I 
accordingly detached Omer Bey for the purpose of advancing from Sidon, 
with 2,000 Turks, upon Tyre, and thence to occupy the pass of the White 
Mountain to the northward of this place. And, on the 31st, the Admiral 
made sail from Beyrout roads, having previously embarked in the squadron 
3,000 men, under the immediate command of the Pasha Selim, and small 
detachments of Royal Artillery and Sappers, under Major Higgins, of 
the former corps, and Lieutenant Aldrich, Royal Engineers. 

Omer Bey reached the position assigned to him at the same hour on 
the 2nd instant that the fleet appeared off Acre. 

Owing to light winds, the ships did not get into action till two p.m. 
on the 3rd, when an animated fire commenced, and was maintained, 
without intermission, until darkness closed the operations of the day. 
About three hours later, the Governor, with a portion of the garrison, 
quitted the town, which was taken possession of by the allied troops at 
daylight the following morning. 

The moral influence on the cause in which we are engaged that will 
result from its surrender, is incalculable. 

During the bombardment, the principal magazine and the whole 
arsenal blew up. By the explosion, two entire regiments, formed in posi- 
tion on the ramparts, were annihilated, and every living creature within 
the area of 60,000 square yards ceased to exist; the loss of life beine 
variously computed from 1,200 to 2000 persons. Those who may have 
been inclined to doubt the fighting qualities of the Egyptian troops, might 
acquire a lesson from the example of their endurance, if they could but 


Sete ge 
i "t= ae 


57 


contemplate the devastation and scene of horror by which this once 
formidable fortress is enshrouded. 

To the Royal Navy, I should be guilty of great injustice, were I to 
attempt to record services that will be so much more ably detailed by 
their gallant and respected Commander-in-Chief; whilst the early 
departure of the despatch-vessel for Malta, and the labour that has 
devolved on me within the walls, alike deprive me of the means of trans- 
mitting returns of ordnance, ammunition, treasure, &c., &c., that have 
fallen into the hands of the captors, and of giving your Lordship an 
approximation, even, to the amount of prisoners (over 3000); as many are 
still coming in, and others are dragged in numbers from their places of 
refuge and concealment. 

To Her Majesty’s Ambassador at Constantinople, I have reported the 
measures I have adopted for the temporary administration of the Pashalic 
of Acre, pending the pleasure of the Sultan. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) C. F. SMITH, 


Colonel Commanding. 


No. 68. 


Brigadier-General Sir Charles F. Smith to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received 
3 December 13.) ; 
My Lord, St. Jean d’ Acre, November 9, 1840. 

I HAVE the honour to transmit the Return, furnished by the Com- 
manding Officer of Royal Artillery, of ordnance and ammunition found in 
this fortress, the reason for delay in the transmission having been ex- 
plained in my despatch of November 5th. 

The public treasury had been pillaged, so that a sum not exceeding 
£5300 was only discovered; this amount I have made the acting Pasha 
of Acre give credit for in his accounts with the Musteshar Effendi. 

The difficulty of restormg order, in every case where an enemy’s 
town has been carried, is too well understood to need particular notice in 
this place. The propensity, however, of foreigners to plunder, together 
with Ottoman indolence; the necessity for employing interpreters; and 
the generalwant of intelligence exhibited by the undisciplined troops that 
form the mass of my command; have all had their influence in causing some 
of my orders to be disregarded. Such was the case with respect to five 
casemates, filled with fixed ammunition, near which the crater of the former 
explosion was smouldering. Notwithstanding my often repeated instruc- 
tions, personally given, and the assurance of the staff officers that the 
ammunition had been removed to a place of security, an awful calamity 
occurred on the afternoon of the 6th, by the casemates blowing up at 
intervals of five or six seconds between the ignitionof each. In:a moment 
we were enveloped in darkness, accompanied by fragments of masonry, 
with musket-balls, shot, and exploding shells of every denomination. 

The loss in killed and wounded has been considerable; that of the 
Royal Marines will be duly reported by the proper department to the 
Lords of the Admiralty. The Acting Commandant of Acre is amongst 
the former. Captain Collier, R.N., who was standing near me, is badly 
wounded, and I escaped with a severe contusion, only, in the foot, owing 
to the sudden interposition of my horse, who was killed by what would 
otherwise have been my share of the missiles. 

The exertions of the Royal Navy and Marines have since been most 
conspicuous in extinguishing the fire, and in reducing, by precautionary 
measures, the risk which Turkish evolutions, in the midst of gunpowder, 
must ever render more or less probable. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) C. F. SMITH, 


Brigadier-General commanding. 


58 


Inclosure in No. 68. 
St. Jean D’ Acre, November 9, 1840. 
Small Arms, Camp E quipage, Provisions, 


Return of Ordnance, Ammunition, 
&c., &c., &c., seized in the town of 
Ath of November, 1840: 


St. Jean D’ Acre on the morning of the 


ORDNANCE. 
From; Game... 6000506 So pounder o.oo oe 9 
ae tes. PINE ae aera 66 
PS al piace ey coal ae ‘ 20 
12 olay webs eerie 31 
Grenadesee 1. eae ere VOrinch® “ce ccectance 7 
Subs. Rear nin 87 
Iron Howitzers...... 24 pounder ..... ++... 2 
Brass Guns ..<cscaas WSs Fispu bord eaecter ney 5 I 
9 50) LE eweeacsiereanacre 23 
Gin’ Uigaah te teoses orateccns 75 mounted in Park. 
Sn 1 
Brass Howitzers..... OED +. or) (ol Peay eat 13 
12 ssh elec nine ereasne 18 
5% inch 2 
Brass Wlortans: <a. WB ee pee ake! 7 
WO gs 4 
So Resse ptamecaciereimers 4 
BE i JG seated 
Carronade, Iron ..... GS POURAeY ss san! ea ae i 
Tron. Mortars......... Brielle) <.5,. vas miaets 9 in store. 
LSivcsss ie Bet he Buea ae 1 
Sash a ree 1 


—_—— 


Total .... 313—229 mounted on the walls, 


Boxes, Small Arms...580 each box containing 25 muskets. 


Common Case ...... G2) WOUMMTET oo 6 aim nme 900 
Babi Ne oe oe Tt tn 500 
TS) 55 Sateen ee 770 
a 2,000 
Cd os 550 
gt. 400 
Round Shoé.....enea« S2 ss 1,500 
ae fess wekae cies 1,900: 
[if Seip ... 5,000 
1 3,530 
aie 907 Atal. Raley Ne 9,330 
Gs, © dee aes 1,200 
Chant Shot: si.:cc.serse Di ais We) ey oat See 650 
iS 1,650 
LLLP we MNS at a wR 1,900 
550 
GRE”, Sa A 190 
Double-headed Shot.. 24 ,, 1,600 
ESO Pl ee yee sees 800 
cea Autre eee es 1,600 
Shells; fixed. .........° SP pounder .....0... 550 
SAE,5 OP tua ere 900 
ES os yeu oc ee 450 
[TD SIN, Deer es See ee 3,000 
G Pe irr Po 1,050 
ge ree Ce UNA 
Shells, unfixed....... 18 inch mortars ...... 1,500 
15 sad. pees 2,650 
oF pee mate cate 2,050 
ghee 1,5 
Shells, unfixed....... 32 pounder Bess ale Aon 3 oa 
24 yg aa . 2,500 
RSp ess ae eae 
PPE See ee Aa 8,500 
CSO a eines athe *) 2,600 
oe ee aR en Bicte  AN UY, 
Barrels, Powder .... 1896 each barrel containing 112 pounds. 
Roxtiines:; equates ae dg w ericcas ws cewek cds 3,000 


Boxes, Small Arm Ball Cartridge, 2,000 each . 2,000 rounds. 


Pieces comme oan aaa asad ts 
Cartridges oi 
Flannel .... 32 pounder cartridges 8 Ibs. each . 1,800 
24 He 6 oa 950 
12 ss Ce 180 
9 i nna ee 250 
6 A Ly 1,200 


Wheat, bushels 

Salt ss 

Rice oS 

India corn ,, se 

Olives, barrels... 
Barley, bushels 

Bread, tons ae 56 
Butter, jars 

Glue, bags 

Charcoal, tons 

Oil, gallons , 4 
Clothing for soldiers, suits 

_ Musket-stocks, wood 
Hair-cloths ~— = 
Anvils for smiths . . 
Bellows, smiths’ .. Ae 
Lathes, turning... A 4 
Lime, bushels 

Spades, common 
Felling-axes 

Shovels a as 
Axes, pick .. = a 
Mill-stones, hand .. 

Camp equipage for men 
Cavalry boots, ang 

Canvas bags 

White thread, lbs. 
Tent-poles 

Leather skins 
Three-eight-inch rope, tons 
Flat iron, tons 

Bolt iron, ,, 

Iron straps 

Hammers, masons’ 35 
Screw-plates 

Screw-taps 

Vices 

Old iron, ous 

Tron axletrees for guns 
Wire hanks 

Horseshoes 

Miners’ scrapers 

Hinges, iron : ab 
Masons’ malls, iron os 
Masons’ picks 

Brass cocks 

Paint brushes 

Tongs, smiths’, pairs 
Miners’ borers we = 
Crowbars .. 

Chains and hand- Cai 
Screws, stocks, and dies, pairs 
Steelyards, pairs 
Slowmatch, tons 

Steel, square, tons ee 
Files, of sorts ae ee 
Well-boring tools . 
Grapnels for boats 
Sheet-lead, tons 

Pig-lead, 55 

Brass bushes 

Sheet-iron, tons . 

Marble slabs, round 
Baskets, sand 

Wire-screens : 

Carts, with wheels” 

Barrows, wheel 


Door-frames, wood or 
Dried hides a os 
Jars of tar es 


Nails, of sorts, tons 
Sulphur, boxes at 
Bales of cloth <6 oe 
Gins for mounting guns .. 
Sheep-skins : 
Buckets, small 


I 2 


59 


PROVISIONS, STORES, &c. &c. 


= 4,000 


“1p, GORDON HIGGINS, 
Lieutenant-Colonel commanding Royal Artillery. 


EDWARD ALDRICH, 


Lieutenant Royal Engineers. 


60 


No. 69. 


Brigadier-General Sir Charles F. Smith to Viscount Palmerston.—(Receiwed 
December 13.) 


My Lord, Beyrout, November 13, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to report that, on the passage through Jaffa of 
such of the Egyptian troops as were enabled to make good their retreat 
from Acre, they were joined in their retrograde movement towards Alex- 
andria by the Governor and 2,000 men of the garrison. 

Selim Aga with 800 Syrians, being the remainder of the enemy’s force 
in Jaffa, determined on giving themselves up to the service of the Sultan 
in Acre. On the road they were attacked ; lost 200 in killed, and were 
plundered, even to nudity, by the tribes professing fidelity to the Sultan 
in that section of the pashalic of Acre. 

Mustafa Bey failed in his attempt to escape from Jaffa, and was taken 
prisoner by the inhabitants. Thus your Lordship will perceive that Jaffa 
is evacuated, but I cannot afford to detach troops for its protection. 

I have, &c., 
C. F. SMITH, 


Brigadier-General Commanding. 


No. 70. 


Brigadier-General Sir Charles F. Smith to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received | 
December 13.) 


(Extract.) | Beyrout, November 16, 1840. 


BY way of Constantinople I have been honoured by your Lordship’s 
despatch of 16th ultimo. 

On the 21st of the same month, your Lordship will have received 
Lord Ponsonby’s recommendation that [ should have the rank of Major- 
General, and also my despatch from Therapia, dated the Ist, in which I 
announced my immediate return to Syria, armed with all requisite powers 
to insure, on my part, a thorough and efficient support to the cause of the 
Sultan in every branch of the service placed under my controul. My mind 
is therefore perfectly at ease, as the next packet cannot fail to correct a 
misapprehension founded upon erroneous data, for I never hinted at health 
being an obstacle, beyond a temporary personal inconvenience at Djouni, 
during which the Admiral benefited by my counsel, whilst he held me to 
be jointly responsible with himself for the result. If ill health contributed 
to my going to Constantinople with despatches, the service and the 
Sultan’s cause were thereby most extraordinarily advanced. 


No. 71. 


Brigadier-General Sir C. F. Smith to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received 
; December 14.) 


Head- Quarters, Beyrout, 
My Lord, : November 18, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to report that the City of Jerusalem is under the 
rule of the Ottoman Government. I have just received official intelligence of 
the inhabitants, headed by the Judge, having deposed the Governor and made 
the Egyptian troops in garrison prisoners. Three hundred cavalry in the city 
had been dismounted for the purpose of serving in the police. 


61 


My means of throwing a garrison into the castle of Jerusalem must be 
onsequent on the movements of Ibrahim Pasha, when the current of military 
events will set to the southward: 
| IT have, &c. 
(Signed) C. F SMITH, 
Brigadier- General Commanding. 


No. 72. 


Brigadier-General Sir C. F. Smith to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received 
December 14.) 


My Lord, Beyrout, November 22, 1840. 


MOST deeply am I impressed by a sense of gratitude for your Lordship’s 
sl ay of 23rd ultimo, and for the assistance | shall have in Brigadier-General 

ichell. 

The selection of Colonel Michell is the most happy that could have been 
made, for his talents and military reputation are as undoubted, as the prospect is 
certain of our working kindly together; we are associated by ties of chivalrous 
~ enthusiasm, fostered in the recollection of services performed in earlier days. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) C. F. SMITH, 
Major-General Commanding. 


No. 73. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received December 8.) 


My Lord, Therapia, November 11, 1840. 


I INCLOSE copy of a despatch I have received from Mr. Wood, and I. 
cannot neglect this opportunity of telling your Lordship, that Admiral Walker 
this morning assured me, that Mr. Wood, by his ability and exertion, had done: 
more towards the success obtained in Syria, than any other man, excepting, 


Commodore Napier. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure in No. 73. 


Mr. Wood to Viscount Ponsonby. 


Her Majesty’s Ship ‘‘ Thunderer,” off Acre, 
My Lord, November 4, 1840. 

ON the 31st ultimo I embarked on board Her Majesty’s ship “ Thun- 
derer,” to accompany the British fleet, and Admiral Walker Bey, on an 
expedition against Acre, in the bay of which place we arrived on the 2nd 
instant. 

On the 3rd, the vessels took up their several positions off the fortress, and 
opened a terrific fire soon after two o’clock, p.m., which was continued throughout 
the day, reducing the town, in a very short interval of time, to a heap of 
ruins. 


eae eee et ee Ne 
oa) = . 


62 


During the bombardment, one of the inclosed magazines exploded, sending 

into the. air no less than 1,200 miserable beings, and spreading destruction 
everywhere by the shower of stones that followed it. Part of the fortifications 
on the land side suffered greatly from it. The remaining troops abandoned the 
fortress in the night, information of which being carried on board to Walker 
Bey, a body of men immediately landed, and Acre was taken possession of in 
the name of the Sultan, whose victorious standard was seen floating on the 
ramparts at daybreak. _ 
I can pay no greater tribute to the gallantry of the British, Ottoman, and 
Austrian Admirals, and of the officers serving under them, than by recording 
the fact of the capture of Acre in three hours and a half after the signal was 
made to engage, which fact alone speaks more for their gallantry and exertions 
in the cause of the Sultan, than any terms of mine can possibly convey. 

I visited the town early this morning, where I met Sir Charles Smith and 
his Excellency Selim Pasha (whose efforts in the service of his Sovereign are 
beyond all praise) ; and never have I witnessed such a scene of utter desolation 
and destruction before. It surpasses all description. Suffice it to say, that the 
dead bodies of men and of animals, and fragments of walls, meet one’s view in 
every direction. 

Sheik Hamid-el-Bek, the Mutuali Chief, about whom I have had already 
the honour of writing to your Lordship, had received orders to join us outside 
of Acre. On his way he fell in with the fugitives, and attacked them; but as 
they had with them seven field pieces, he was obliged to allow them to pass, 
after losing 200 of his followers. 

I need not remark on the joy that the news of the capture of Acre will 
produce in the country. I trust it will encourage the natives to co-operate 
actively and heartily with us in dispersing and driving out of Syria Ibrahim 
Pasha and the remnants of his Army ; towards effecting which, I have presented 
to his Excellency Selim Pasha several influential Sheiks of note, namely: Sheik 
Said, to take the temporary command of the districts of Safet, Tiberias, Nasra, 
Sahil Aklif, Shefi Omar, Il Gebel, Saour, and Sahl, and guard, with the 
assistance of the natives, the passes of Djise-binat-yacoub and Lebtcha Bogas ; 
Sheik Hamid-el-Bek and Sheik Hasn-el Suleiman, to guard the country of 
Beshara; Sheik Hafly (Turkoman Chief), to guard the road from Djise to 
Damascus; Sheik Abdul-Rhahman, to take possession of Djebel Halil (Hebron) ; 
and Aisabga, Governor of Gaza, to declare immediately for the Sultan, to 
govern that district in his name, and to intercept all the convoys from Egypt. 
Should he consent to act for the Sultan, and I am assured positively he will, an 
inland communication will be then established as far south as Gaza, bordering 
on Egypt, and all the intermediate country may be considered as having 
returned to its allegiance to the Porte. 

Some of these Sheiks are to be furnished with arms, and are to cut off all 
communication with Egypt. They are further directed to cut off Ibrahim 
Pasha’s retreat, if possible, or to be prepared to close on him in case they are 
ordered to do so. 

While I beg respectfully to offer my sincere congratulations to your 
Lordship on the signal success that has attended your Excellency’s efforts to 
restore Syria to the Sultan, I may be permitted confidently to assert that, if the 
same energetic measures are steadily pursued, and advantage be taken of the 
actual demoralization of the Egyptian troops, Ibrahim Pasha must relinquish 
in a couple of weeks all hopes of further resistance, and must think of securing 
his retreat to Egypt. 

_ I regret not to have it in my power to state precisely the number of 
prisoners made, but they may be estimated at nearly 3,000. We had only 14 
men killed, and 26 wounded. 

Though a great part of the ammunition and stores must have been destroyed 
by the explosion of the Arsenal, still an immense quantity of matértel de guerre 
remains, among which, I am happy to be able to add, is the park of artillery 
taken at Nezib. 


I have, &c., 
(Signed) RICHARD WOOD. 


= ee seeeeenesesenieeee ree ee 


63 
No. 74. 


Mr. Consul Larking to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received December 9.) 


My Lord, Alexandria, November 16, 1840. 


SINCE I had last the honour to address your Lordship, Mehemet Ali has 
given unequivocal proofs of his dissatisfaction with the French Government, 
and evinced the strongest desire to settle differences with the Sultan through 
the mediation of the Four Powers. 

On the 8th instant, M. Cochelet had a public audience, for the purpose of 
presenting some officers; Mehemet Ali was. at the time in conference with 
Achmet Pasha, and other officers of the fleet, when before them, and in the: 
presence of many Europeans, he loudly complained of the treatment he had. 
received from the French Government, telling M. Cochelet that the present. 
disastrous state of his affairs was entirely owing to his having listened to the 
counsels of France; then, addressing those around him, he said that he had 
lost all confidence in the French Government, and had abandoned the hope of 
its affording him any effectual aid in the present crisis, and that in future he 
would be guided by his own views. 

The following day he received the intelligence of the fall of Acre, which 
threw him into the deepest dejection; he, however, shortly afterwards. 
despatched a courier to Ibrahim Pasha, with instructions to evacuate the whole 
of Syria, and intimated to those in his confidence that he was now prepared to 
give up the Turkish fleet, and comply with all the demands of the Sultan, 
provided he could be insured the quiet possession of Egypt. 

In furtherance of this resolution, he gave orders that the ships of the fleet, 
which had lately been prepared for service, should be immediately dismantled, 
and the crews for the time placed in the land batteries, which order is being 
rapidly executed. 

M. Cochelet and M. Walewski, on learning this determination, were most 
indefatigable in their endeavours to, dissuade Mehemet Ali from any attempt at 
an arrangement with the European Powers, in which France should not be the 
mediatrix, and for a time he seemed to waver, till the arrival yesterday of the 
French Post Office steamer, with the intelligence of a change of Ministry in 
France, appeared to confirm him in his previous resolution. 

Being desirous of ascertaining the true state of affairs, 1 called on Boghos 
Bey, who confirmed what I have stated in the most positive manner ; on which 
I hinted to him that it might be advisable to acquaint Sir Robert Stopford with 
the circumstance; to which he replied, that M.Cochelet having informed 
Mehemet Ali that there was now every prospect of propositions being made to 
him, regarding which there would be no difference of opinion between the 
Governments of Great Britain and France, he had decided on taking no step 
till such propositions were made, but that he nevertheless adhered to his 
resolution of evacuating Syria, and of giving up the Turkish fleet on being 
ensured the government of Egypt. ; 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) JOHN W. LARKING. 


No. 75. 
Mr. Consul Larking to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received December 9.) 


My Lord, Alexandria, November 24, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to inform your Lordship, that on the 22nd instant, 
Captain Maunsell, of Her Majesty’s ship ‘‘ Rodney,” came into the harbour 
with a flag of truce, being the bearer of a letter from Commodore Napier to 
Boghos Bey, the purport of which was to demand the liberty of certain Druse 
Sheiks made prisoners during the late events in Syria, and at the same time 
recommending him to urge upon Mehemet Ali the necessity of speedily settling 
his differences with the Sultan, by ordering the immediate evacuation of Syria, 
and restoring the Turkish fleet ; adding, that such acts would ensure him the 
hereditary Government of Egypt. 


64 


Captain Maunsell had an interview with Mehemet Ali, and on the 
following day returned to the squadron, with the answer of Boghos Bey to the 
Commodore’s letter. In this he states that Mehemet Ali had never entertained 
the intention of retaining the Turkish fleet ; that he was aware of the determina- 
tion of the Four Powers to grant him the hereditary possession of Egypt ; and 
that he was sending troops to the frontier of Syria, merely with the view of 
reopening the communications with his son. 

I thought it advisable to accompany Captain Maunsell to the squadron, in 
order to acquaint Commodore Napier with the position of affairs, and particularly 
with the change in the policy of Mehemet Ali, which was the subject of my 
last despatch, and of which I have the honour to inclose a duplicate. 

Upon these statements, Commodore Napier decided on making another 
communication to Mehemet Ali, by addressing a second letter to Boghos Bey, 
in which he called on him to state, clearly and explicitly, the intentions of 
Mehemet Ali respecting the evacuation of Syria, and the restitution of the fleet, 
offering, in the event of his complying with the wishes of the Allied Powers on 
these points, the hereditary Government of Egypt, and every facility in with- 
drawing his remaining troops from Syria. Captain Maunsell was again charged 
with this letter, the Commodore coming with us in a steamer to the mouth of 
the harbour, intending, if the answer to his letter was favourable, to wait on 
Mehemet Ali, and bring the negotiation at once to a close. 

On arriving on shore, I accompanied Captain Maunsell to the palace: it 
being the season of Ramazan, Mehemet Ali had not left his private apartments, 
consequently the letter was given to one of his officers. Shortly after he 
requested to see me in private ; and I took this opportunity of pressing on him 
the expediency of at once complying with the demand of the Commodore, as the 
only means left him of retaining his position in Egypt, and pointed out the 
uselessness of further resistance, and of placing himself in opposition to the 
views of the Allied Powers. He immediately answered, that such was no longer 
his intention ; that for some time past he had made up his mind both to evacuate 
Syria and surrender the fleet; and that he was prepared to do both on the future 
position of himself and family being guaranteed by Great Britain or by the Allied 
Powers. I said, that Commodore Napier was prepared to give the guarantee he 
required; on which he observed, that he feared that Commodore Napier, 
although willing to do so, was not invested with sufficient authority to act in a 
matter affecting the interests of so many Powers, and proposed that immediate 
notice of his intention should be given to your Lordship, requesting that Her 
Majesty’s Government would give authority for concluding the negotiation on 
the basis proposed by the Commodore. I then told him that from what I had 
seen of Commodore Napier, I was confident that he would construe such a 
proposal into a desire to gain time, to which in the present state of affairs he 
would never consent. I also added, that up to this present moment no act of 
hostility had been committed against Egypt; that if unfortunately such an event 
should occur, it would place him in a very different position; and he might 
become a suppliant for those very conditions which were now freely offered to 
him. He then told me, he would take the subject into consideration, and give 
his answer on the following day; that he was willing to receive the Commodore, 
who, he hoped, would enter the harbour with the “Medea” steamer. This 
invitation has been conveyed to the Commodore, who will bring the steamer 
into port to-morrow, it being too late to do so this evening. 

_ The “ Oriental” steam ship having been detained beyond her time, with the 
view of conveying to your Lordship the earliest intelligence of events passing 
here, I close this despatch ; and should I not have an opportunity of conveying 
any additional intelligence by this opportunity, I shall avail myself of the 
earliest that offers. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) JOHN W. LARKING. 


a er a a 


feat nea ate ee a 


65 


No. 76. 


Mr. Consul Larking to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received December 9.) 


My Lord, Alexandria, November 26, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to acquaint your Lordship, that in accordance with 
what I stated in my last despatch, of the 24th instant, Commodore Napier 
came on shore yesterday morning, and has since been in negotiation with 
Mehemet Ali, which has so far led to a satisfactory arrangement that there 
remains but one point on which the Commodore considers it advisabie to demand 
further explanation. 

The final propositions made by Commodore Napier were, that Mehemet 
Ali should give orders for the immediate evacuation of Syria; that the Turkish 
fleet should be got ready for sea; but that, in consideration of the doubts 
expressed by Mehemet Ali as to the authority possessed by the Commodore for 
concluding a Convention, its restitution should not take place until Mehemet 
Ali should receive official assurances, that the hereditary Government of Egypt 
should be guaranteed by the Allied Powers. 

That point on which there still remains a doubt, arises from a paragraph in 
the last communication from Boghos Bey, which states, that instructions will be 
given to concentrate the Egyptian troops in Syria, in order that they may be 
ready for evacuating that country immediately after the receipt of the approval 
by the Allied Powers of the present arrangement. 

As the Commodore attaches great importance to the immediate and 
unconditional evacuation of Syria, and as his propositions were principally based 
thereon, he cannot consent that an opening should exist for any misconception, 
which might eventually lead to an evasion of the objects contemplated: he has, 
therefore, made a further communication to Boghos Bey, and I have great hopes 
that the point will be conceded. ‘The Commodore informs me, that he has sent 
copies of all the correspondence on the subject to the Admiralty, to which 
department he refers your Lordship, there having been no time to furnish me 
with copies, in consequence of his desire that the India mail on board the 
‘‘ Oriental” steam ship should be subjected to no further detention. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) JOHN W. LARKING. 


P.S.—Since writing the above, I have accompanied the Commodore to 
Mehemet Ali, and have to report to your Lordship that all doubts as to the 
immediate and unconditional evacuation of Syria are removed, Mehemet Ali 
having declared his intention of fulfilling the wishes of Commodore Napier in 
that respect. 


No. 77. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewved December 10.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, November 18, 1840. 


IT is evening of this day ; Mehemet Ali must have known of the fall of 
Acre on the 5th instant ; and there are no signs here of his submission to the 
Sultan. Letters from Alexandria of the 6th, and I believe the 7th, mention 
continued efforts to reinforce Ibrahim in Syria. The partizans of the French 
assert that there are discontents in Syria; they state some things as facts, which 
are almost ridiculous, and cannot be true; but it is true that the French 
Agents are indefatigable to raise disturbance in that country. I have urged the 
Ottoman Ministers not to allow success to make them relax in their exertions. 

The Porte has recalled Izzet Pasha, which is a great good. Selim 
Pasha will probably be appointed Governor ; Selim, who fought so bravely, and 
who is faithful. ‘The Porte has given powers to General Jochmus, in con- 
formity with your Lordship’s instructions. I have notified the fact to Sir C. 
Smith, and sent him an extract from the instruction. 


66 


1 have relieved Mr. Wood from the duty of interpreter to Sir C. Smith, and 
the consequent confinement to trifling duties that anybody could perform; and 
I have desired him to resume his active exertions amongst the Syrians, by 
which he has produced such signal good. I have also directed Mr. Wood no 
longer to consider himself Vice-Consul; I have instructed him to consider 
himself absolutely free from the authority and control of everybody in Syria, 
in his execution of the duties of the trusts reposed in him by the Porte ; 
but to make his reports to me on all he does. | 

We hear from Alexandria, that the people there are in ardent hope of an 
attack being made by the Sultan’s Allies upon the city, and of their deliverance 
from Mehemet Ali. It is also said, that an insurrection is not improbable, even 
without an attack; so odious is the rule of the Pasha, and so great the hatred 
against his family. 
eee eee ee —————=—=—_—== 


No. 78. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewed December 12.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, November 20, 1840. 


YESTERDAY M. Titow communicated to me the instruction he 
had just received from St. Petersburgh, directing him to concur in any steps 
taken by his colleagues, in furtherance of your Lordship’s instructions to me, 
dated 15th October. 

We agreed that nothing could be now done under the authority of that 
instruction, because Mehemet Ali has not made his submission to the Sultan ; 
and the view we took is fortified by our having been informed, that the Inter- 
nuncio’s instructions, corresponding with those in your Lordship’s instructions, 
-have lately been modified by recent instructions received from Vienna. 

I have the honour to inclose three papers, communicated to me by his 
Excellency the Internuncio. 

No. 1 shows the final arrangement with the Pasha of Candia, for the 
re-establishment of the Sultan’s authority in that island. 

No. 2 reports the situation of affairs at Cairo, and shows the loose hold of 
Mehemet Ali upon the people of that part of Egypt, and to what devices he has 
been obliged to resort to keep up the fast fading shadow of his ancient authority. 
This same number further reports the state of things at Alexandria, showing 
that the authority of Mehemet Ali is there also so low, that the least effort on 
the part of the Sultan would finally extinguish it. 

No. 3 reports occurrences already known to your Lordship, viz., the 
retreat of the Egyptian troops from the Taurus, Adana, &c., &c., and it states 
the fact, much to be regretted, that the Turks ill-treat the Christian Rayahs in 
some parts of Syria, and concludes with the lamentable accident of the 
explosion at Acre. 

With the exception of this last-mentioned event, the contents of these 
papers bear directly upon the subject-matter of your Lordship’s instructions ; 
for they throw a strong light upon the nature and extent of the power of 
Mehemet Ali, and show that it is limited and unsubstantial. If these reports 
are true, and they are corroborated by the evidence of all people in this 
country, who have had means for seeing and hearing what is passing, it will be 
obvious that those notions of the power of Mehemet Ali, which have been so 
long cherished and confided in, are unfounded in any reality; and that now, at 
least, there are no reasons why Mehemet Ali should be treated with any 
consideration by the Sultan or his Allies. He has resisted to the last; he has 
been the cause of expense, trouble, and inquietude to all the Powers of Europe ; 
he has defied and deceived the Sultan; and it will only be when resistance is out 
of his power that he submits. ‘The grounds upon which the French professed to 
support him have been cut from under them ; it is proved, that he cannot add 
to the general strength of the Ottoman Empire ; and it is proved that Mehemet 
Ali’s object was to partition it. 

The people of Egypt pray to be delivered from his yoke; they are even 
more hostile to him than the Syrians, but they have not had the means to 
show their hatred of him as the others have done. 


67 


Inclosure 1 in No. 78. 
Rechid Pasha to Baron de Stiirmer. 


M. V’Internonce, Sublime Porte, le 18 Novembre, 1840. 


LA Sublime Porte désirant faire partir au plus tét pour Candie Nouri Bey, 
porteur du firman de confirmation de Moustapha Pacha, comme Gouverneur de 
cette Ile, me charge de vous prier, M. l’Internonce, de vouloir bien permettre 
que le brick de guerre Autrichien ‘‘ Le Montecuculi,” seul armement Allié 
actuellement disponible, conduise Nouri Bey en Candie. 

Votre Excellence n’ignore point que Moustapha Pacha est déja prét a se 
soumettre a lautorité du Sultan, et que la mission de Nouri Bey n’est qu’une 
mesure de simple forme destinée surtout a faire cesser les incertitudes de I’Ile. 
Or, la présence d’un batiment de guerre Allié, expédié en Candie uniquement 
pour y conduire ce messager, ne pourrait que pulssamment concourir a faire 
atteindre ce but. 

Nouri Bey pourra partir dans trois ou quatre jours, il en restera autant 
en Candie, et la Sublime Porte désirerait que le ‘‘ Montecuculi” le ramenat ici. 

Recevez, Monsieur, &c., 


(Signé) RECHID PACHA. 


(Translation.) 


M. l’Internonce, Sublime Porte, November 18, 1840. 


THE Sublime Porte being desirous to despatch to Candia, as soon as pos- 
sible, Nouri Bey, who is the bearer of the firman confirming Mustapha Pasha as 
Governor of that island, directs me to request, M. l’Internonce, that you will 
have the goodness to permit the Austrian brig of war ‘* Le Montecuculi,” the 
only disposable Allied ship of war, to take Nouri Bey to Candia. 

Your Excellency is aware that Mustapha is now ready to submit to the 
authority of the Sultan, and that the mission of Nouri Bey is merely a matter of 
form, principally designed to put an end to the state of uncertainty existing 
in the island. Now, the presence of an Allied ship of war sent to Candia, for 
the sole purpose of taking this messenger there, cannot fail to have a powerful 
effect in bringing about that object. 

Nouri Bey will be ready to set out in three or four days; he will remain 
about the same time in Candia, and the Sublime Porte would wish that the 
“ Montecuculi” should bring him back here. 

Receive, &c., 


(Signed) RECHID PASHA. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 78. 


Extract of Letters from Cairo of the 3rd and 5th November, and from Alexandria 
of the 6th and 7th November, 1840. 


CAIRE. 


LA ville du Caire est continuellement dans un état d’agitation difficile a 
décrire. Le Gouvernement cherche a cacher les facheuses nouvelles qui lui 
arrivent de la Syrie, mais tant la prise de Beyrouth, que celle de Tarsous et 
d’Adana, sont connues. La défaite d’Ahmet Pacha sur lOronte vient d’aug- 
menter le nombre des tristes nouvelles. 

Pour animer le peuple, on lui fait croire qu’une division de 6,000 va étre 
organisée et expédiée en Syrie, pour renforcer les garnisons de St. Jean d’Acre 
et de Gaza. Mais on ne sait pas dot ces troupes surgiront, car il n’y a que 
treize compagnies d’Infanterie, et quatre escadrons ici et dans les environs. 

_ Aux troupes arrivées du Hedjas on a payé deux mois sur les quarante-sept 
appointemens arriérés. On voulait faire le méme effort 4 légard des escadres, 
mais les équipages Turques ayant nenaé é accepter un a compte si insignifiant, 


68 


on se propose de payer la moitié des arriéres en argent comptant et le reste 
en blé, légumes, &c. 

La population est tellement démoralisée que le Gouvernement ayant 
demandé 65,000 manteaux pour la troupe, les marchands_refus¢rent de livrer les 
draps, et une partie des tailleurs, de peur d’étre forcés 4 en confectionner, se sont 
enfuis. 

Méhémet Ali, ayant appris la défection de Emir Béchir, a mis en liberté 
les douze Emirs qu’il voulait envoyer au Sennaar, comme ennemis de I’Emir. 
Ils rentreront dans leur pays natal pour agir sous les ordres d’Ibrahim Pacha. 
On ajoute que Raman Beg Gambalat, Abu Nekr, et Amud Sheh, Chefs des 
Druses arrétés au Caire, & la demande de Emir Béchir seront chargés du 
commandement de l’expédition des 6,000 susmentionnée. 


ALEXANDRIE. 


La frégate Francaise ‘“ L’Embuscade,” et la corvette ‘“ Bourgainville,” 
sont arrivées le 31, dans le port vieux d’Alexandrie. Ces arrivages avaient 
inspiré de la confiance aux amis de Méhémet Ali, mais quatre jours apres 
on apprit le départ de la flotte Francaise pour Toulon, et lenthousiasme 
se refroidit depuis de jour en jour, 4 un tel point, que Méhémet Ali est sur le 
point d’étre abandonné par la plupart de ses amis. II parle encore de ses 
intentions de sortir avec son escadre, mais personne n’y croit plus. Ce moyen 
de maintenir le peuple tranquille étant usé, il cherche a l’égarer par les nouvelles 
que le Consul de Danemarck doit lui apporter de Vienne, et qui seraient tres- 
favorables a sa cause. . 

Cependant Ja déchéance prononcée contre lui par le Grand Seigneur 
commence a faire une impression trés-facheuse sur le peuple. On lui attribue 
les dégats causés par le Nil, les maladies de V’armée de la Syrie, les défaites, 
défections, &c., derniérement arrivées. Une démonstration de la part des Alliés 
suffirait pour faire soulever contre Méhémet Ali non seulement le peuple, mais 
aussi les troupes de terre et de mer. Le Rédif déclare hautement qu’il ne se 
battra dans aucun cas contre les troupes du Sultan. 


(Translation.) 


CAIRO. 


THE city of Cairo is in a constant state of agitation difficult to be de- 
scribed. The Government seeks to conceal the bad news which arrive from 
Syria; but the capture of Beyrout, as well as that of Tarsus and Adana, are 
known. The defeat of Ahmet Pasha on the Orontes has increased the amount 
of bad news, 

In order to animate the people, they are made to believe that a division of 
6,600 men is about to be organised, and despatched to Syria, to reinforce the 
garrisons of St. Jean d’Acre and of Gaza. But it is not known from whence 
these troops will come, for there are only thirteen companies of infantry, and 
four squadrons of cavalry here and in the neighbourhood. 

The troops, which have arrived from the Hedjaz, have been paid two 
months out of the forty-seven in arrear. It was intended to make the same 
effort with regard to the naval squadron, but the Turkish crews having refused to 
accept so insignificant a sum, it is proposed to pay half of the arrears in. ready 
money, and the remainder in corn, pulse, &c. 

The population is so demoralized, that the Government having required 
65,000 cloaks for the troops, the merchants refused to furnish the cloth; and 
some of the tailors, from fear of being forced to make the cloaks, fled. 

Mehemet Ali, having learnt the defection of the Emir Bechir, has liberated 
the twelve Emirs whom he wished to send to Sennaar, as enemies of the Emir. 
They will return to their native country, to act under the orders of Ibrahim 
Pasha. It is added, that Raman Beg Gambalat, Abu Nekr, and Amud Sheh, 
Chiefs of the Druses arrested at Cairo, at the request of the Emir Bechir will 
be charged with the command of the above-mentioned expedition of 6,000 men. 


69 
ALEXANDRIA. 


The French frigate ‘‘1’?Embuscade,” and the corvette ‘ Bourgainville.” 
arrived on the 81st, in the old harbour of Alexandria. These achive pan 
inspired the friends of Mehemet Ali with confidence, but four days after 
they learnt the departure of the French fleet for Toulon, and since that time, 
the enthusiasm has cooled daily, to such a degree that Mehemet Ali is on the 
point of being abandoned by the greatest part of his friends. He still talks of 
his intention of going out with his squadron, but nobody any longer believes in it. 
This means of keeping the people quiet being worn out, he seeks to mislead them 
by the intelligence which the Danish Consul is to bring him from Vienna, and 
which is to be very favourable to his cause. 

However, the sentence of deprivation pronounced against him by the Grand 
Signor begins to make a very unfavourable impression upon the people. They 
attribute to it the damage caused by the Nile, the sickness in the army of Syria, 
the defeats, desertions, &c., which have lately occurred. A demonstration on 
the part of the Allies would be sufficient to raise against Mehemet Ali not only 
the people, but also the land and sea forces. The militia declare loudly that they 
will not fight, in any case, against the Sultan’s troops. 


Inclosure 3 in No. 78. 
The Austrian Vice-Consul to the Baron de Sturmer. 


Eccelenza, Vice Consolato Austriaco, Beirut, Novembre 8, 1840. 


HO Vonore da participarle che il Signor de Steindl rechera a vostra 
Eccelenza la notizia della presa de St. G. d’Acre, ove dopo 26 ore di occupazione, 
si ebbe il dispiacere di vedervi saltare una mina che distrusse mezzo castello, 
uccise cento persone fra Inglesi ed Ottomani, feri gravemente il Commandante 
della fregata Inglese la ‘‘ Castore,’’ e leggiermente il Generale Sir C. Smith. 

L’Ex-Governatore di Beirut, Mahmoud Bey, che col Mudir ed altri 
uffiziali Egiziani aveva preso la fuga da Acre, conducendo 14 mule cariche del 
tesoro, fu arrestato dai montanari e ricondotto in Acre assieme a quella scorta. 

In quest’ istante ricevei la nuova che Ibrahim Pacha richiamando con 
tutta sollecitudine le sue truppe delle frontieri, circa 8,000 Egiziani vengono 
di evacuare Kulek Bugaz, Adina, Bailan, Antiochio, &c., ripiegandosi verso 
Aleppo, che deve essere gia evacuato, abbandonando il loro bagaglio ed 
uccidendo quei ammalati chi non potevano seguirli. 

I] Signore Steindl informera vostra Eccelenza delle vessazioni insolite e del 
cattivo ed impunito procedere delle truppe Stambolline verso li Christiani Raya 
ed il loro Clero, cose che avranno triste conseguenze si non vengono ripresse. 

Ho l’onore, &c., 


(Segnato) GEORGIO LAURELO. 
(Translation.) 
Excellency, Austrian Vice-Consulate, Beyrout, November 8, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to inform you, that M. de Steindl will report to your 
Excellency the news of the capture of St. Jean d’Acre, where, twenty-six hours 
after its occupation, a mine unfortunately exploded, which destroyed half the 
Castle, killed a hundred people, English and Turks, and wounded the Captain of 
the English frigate “ Castor” severely, and General Sir C. Smith slightly. 

The Ex-Governor of Beyrout, Mahmoud Bey, who, with the Mudir and 
other Egyptian officers, had fled from Acre, taking with them fourteen mule-loads 
of treasure, was stopped by the mountaineers, and taken back to Acre, together 
with his escort. 

I have just received the news, that Ibrahim Pasha having recalled in all 
haste his troops from the frontier, about 8,000 Egyptians have evacuated 
Kulek Boghaz, Adana, Beilan, Antioch, &c., falling back on Aleppo, which must 
now be evacuated, abandoning their baggage, and putting to death such among 
the sick who were unable to follow them. 


70 


M. Steindl will inform your Excellency of the unusual vexations, and of the 
infamous and unpunished proceedings of the Constantinopolitan troops towards 
the Christian Rayahs and their clergy,—proceedings which, if not repressed, will 


have dreadful consequences. 
I have the honour, &c., 
(Signed) GEORGE LAURELO. 


fe 2 SelM aS a I a a a Bee 
No. 79. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received December 12.) | 


My Lord, Therapia, November 21, 1840. 


I HAVE mentioned the propriety of relieving Syria from the blockade, 
and the Sublime Porte will, I believe, take the proper steps in that matter. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No. 80. 
Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


(Extract.) Foreign Office, December 12, 1840. 


I HAVE received your despatch of November 18; and I have to acquaint 
your Excellency that Her Majesty’s Government approve the arrangements 
which you have made respecting Mr. Wood’s duties in Syria. 

Her Majesty’s Government. have also received, with satisfaction, the 
intelligence contained in your despatch, of the recall of Izzet Pasha, who, by the 
violence of his temper, and. by the ferocity of his character, was eminently unfit 
for the post to which he had been appointed in Syria. 

I take this opportunity to state to your Excellency that, as the Syrians 
have been urged by British Authorities to take up arms for the Sultan, and to 
declare themselves in his favour, it is peculiarly incumbent on. the British 
Government to omit no effort to induce the Porte to make such future arrange- 
ments for the administration of the Government of Syria, as may secure the 
Syrians from oppression, and render them contented and prosperous. 

Her Majesty’s Government are not. sufficiently conversant with the internal. 
arrangements of Turkish Administration, to be able to say what specific measures 
would be best adapted for this purpose; but they wish your Excellency to 
inform them what are the intentions of the Porte in this respect; and I have to 
instruct your Excellency to press upon the Turkish Government in the strongest 
manner, that it is. essential for the honour of the Sultan, and for the future 
tranquillity of the Turkish Empire, that the arrangements to be made on this 
matter should afford full security and satisfaction to the Syrians. 


No. 81. 
_ Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received December 10.) 


(Extract.) Vienna, December 2, 1840. 


PRINCE METTERNICH is of opinion that the time is come to take 
into consideration the advice to be given to the Sultan with regard to the 
Government of Syria. He thinks the re-establishment of the former Pashalics 
according to their ancient divisions, the best mode which the Porte can adopt, 
with the exception of the fortress of St. Jean d’Acre, with regard to which he 
suggests that it should be placed in an efficient state of defence, and be separated 
with its rayon from the Pashalic of Acre, the command of it being entrusted 
to a Governor named by the Porte, with a garrison to be furnished ail relieved 
from Constantinople. 


1 Nt ne ee 


71 


No. 82. 


Viscount Palmerston to Lord Beauvale. 


(Extract.) Foreign Office, December 18, 1840. 


WITH reference to your Excellency’s despatch of the 2nd_ instant, 
reporting the opinions entertained by Prince Metternich as to the nature of 
arrangements which it would be expedient to make for the future government 
of Syria, I have to state to your Excellency, that Her Majesty’s Government are 
aware, that im order to form a correct opinion upon these matters, they ought to 
have a knowledge of many details with regard to which they are at present 
uninformed ; but that it appears to them, as far as they have the meansof judging, | 
that the opinions expressed by Prince Metternich upon the points treated of in 
your Excellency’s despatch, are sound and judicious. 


No. 83. 


Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received December 13.) 


(Extract.) Paris, December 11, 1840. 
I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Lordship’s 
despatches to the 8th instant. 
The inclosed “ Moniteur” contains an account published by the French 
Government of the negotiation which preceded Mehemet Ali’s acceptance of the 
conditions proposed to him by Commodore Napier. 


No. 84. 
Viscount Palmerston to Earl Granville. 


(Extract.) Foreign Office, December 15, 1840. 


WITH reference to your Excellency’s despatch of the 11th instant, 
I herewith transmit to your Excellency a copy of a letter from Commodore 
Napier to me, dated the 26th ultimo. 

I also inclose for your Excellency’s information, a copy of Commodore 
Napier’s despatch to the Secretary of the Admiralty, transmitting copies of his 
correspondence with Boghos Bey. 


No. 85. 
Commodore Napier to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewed December 12.) 


‘My Lord, ** Medea,”’ Alexandria, November 26, 1840. 


I HAVE sent to the Admiralty copies of my correspondence with the 
Egyptian Government. I am not able to send the reply to my last letter, because 
it will not be ready till to-night, when everything will be signed. But I am just 
come from the Pasha and Boghos Bey, who have consented to the immediate 
evacuation of Syria. But as I have already kept the ‘‘ Oriental’”’ three days, I 
-did not think it right to detain her longer. I hope] am right, and that I have 
done what I think you wish; and as I feel certain the Turkish Army, as it is, could 
not have followed up Ibrahim without cavalry, artillery, or commissariat, 1 
thought it better to get them out of Syria by treaty. Had we attacked them at 
Zachlé, it would have been different; but they are retired on Damascus. A 
French steamer arrived here three days ago with a Negotiator, besides the one 
they had: here; and they did all they could to prevent this. But six eighty- 
gun ships negotiate better than a steamer. I should have sent your Lordship 
copy of the papers, but I could not any longer detain the Indian mail. 
I shall, probably, send a steamer home with the Convention. 


72 


I have done what I think will meet the views of the Government. I know 
the responsibility I incur. But an officer ought not to be afraid of acting 
without instructions, when it is for the advantage of his country. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER. 


ad 
No. 86. 
Sir John Barrow to Lord Leveson. 


My Lord, Admiralty, December 14, 1840. 


I AM commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to send 
you herewith, for the information of Viscount Palmerston, copies of a letter from 
Commodore Napier, dated the 26th of last month, and of its several inclosures, 
containing the correspondence which has taken place between himself and the 
Egyptian Crovernment. 

Iam, & 


Cs 
(Signed) JOHN BARROW. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 86. 


Commodore Napier to R. More O’ Ferrall, Esq. 


“ Medea” Steamer, 
Sir, Alexandria, November 26, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour of inclosing copies of a correspondence that has taken 
place between the Egyptian Government and myself. I have not been able to 
send the reply to my last letter, as I could not get it till late this evening ; but I 
am this moment returned from the Pasha and Boghos Bey, who have consented 
to the immediate evacuation of Syria; and as the India mail has been already 
detained three days, I do not like to detain her another. 

I hope their Lordships will approve of the steps I have taken to at once 
settle the Eastern Question. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 86. 
Commodore Napier to Boghos Bey. 


H.B.M. Ship “ Powerful,” 
Sir, Off Alexandria, November 22, 1840. 


THIS will be delivered to your Excellency by Captain Maunsell, an old 
acquaintance of his Highness Mehemet Ali. I send him to request his 
Highness will consent to release, or exchange, the Emirs and Sheiks of 
Lebanon, who were sent to Alexandria last July by the authorities of Syria. 
The greater part of those unfortunate individuals were arrested only on 
suspicion of eet ae at the instigation of the late Grand Prince, whose 

overnment of Lebanon was anything but just, or moderat 
te deserted Mehemet Ali. ice ; prawn 

The retaining those unhappy individuals in captivity can answer no 
good purpose at present: Lebanon is entirely freeand armed; and come 
what may in other parts of Syria, the mountains never can again fall 
under the rule of Mehemet Ali. 

His Highness is no doubt aware of the willingness of the Allies to 
secure to Mehemet Ali the hereditary government of Egypt. 

Will his Highness permit an old sailor to suggest to him an easy 


~~ ——_— Sa. a a ee 


73 


means of reconciliation to the Sultan and the other Great Powers of 
Europe. 

Let his Highness frankly, freely, and unconditionally deliver up the 
Ottoman fleet and withdraw his troops from Syria; the miseries of war 
would then cease, and his Highness in his latter years would have ample 
and satisfactory occupation in cultivating the arts of peace, and probabl 
laying a foundation for the restoration of the throne of the Ptolemies. 

By what has taken place in Syria, his Highness must be aware what 
can be accomplished in a country where the inhabitants are disaffected 
to the Government. In one month, 6,000 Turks and a handful of marines, 
took Sidon, Beyrout; defeated the Egyptian troops in three actions; pos- 
sessed themselves of 10,000 prisoners and deserters; and caused the eva- 
cuation of all the seaports, the passes of the Taurus and Mount Lebanon; 
and this in the face of an army of more than 30,000 men; and in three 
weeks more, Acre, the key of Syria, fell to the combined fleets, after a 
bombardment of three hours. Should his Highness persist in hostilities, 
will he permit me to ask if he is safe in Egypt? Iam a great admirer of 
his Highness, and would much rather be his friend than enemy. 

In the capacity of the former, | take the liberty of pointing out to 
his Highness, the little hope he can have of ever preserving Egypt, should 
he refuse to be reconciled to the Sultan. 

Experience has shown that the Egyptian army in Syria are disaffected, 
and the whole of the country are in arms against them; and if Ibrahim 
Pasha is attacked by a larger and increasing Turkish force, he will pro- 
bably be forced to lay down hisarms. Let his Highness look to Egypt: 
the Turkish seamen are all disaffected; the Vice-Admiral and several of 
his officers abandoned him a few days ago, and are now in the squadron; 
the Syrian troops in Egypt wish to return to their country; the Egyptians 
are in arrears of pay, and are sighing for their homes. From 12 to 15,000 
Egyptian soldiers now at Constantinople, are being clothed, paid, and 
organized, under the eyes of the Sultan; let his Highness reflect on his 
danger, should they be thrown into Egypt, with a promise of being dis- 
banded, together with the rest of the army, on the overthrow of his 
Highness. 

He may rely upon it, Egypt is not invulnerable; he may rely upon it, 
Alexandria itself may be made to share the fate of Acre; and his Highness, 
who has now an opportunity of founding a dynasty, may sink into a 
simple Pasha. 

Iam, &c., 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER, 
Commodore. 


Inclosure 3 in No. 86. 


Boghos Bey to Commodore Napier. 


M. le Commodore, Alexandrie, le 23 Novembre, 1840. 


J’AI recu avec beaucoup de plaisir la lettre que vous m’avez fait Vhon- 
neur de m’adresser par l’intermédiaire de mon ancien ami M. le Capitaine 
Maunsell, et je me suis empressé d’en mettre la traduction sous les yeux du 
Vice-Roi mon maitre. 

Son. Altesse m’ordonne de vous faire connaitre qu’elle est particuliére- 
ment sensible aux bons sentimens dont elle a trouvé l’expression dans votre 
lettre susdite datée le 22 courant. | 

Il me parait impossible, M. le Commodore, que vous ajoutiez foi aux 
rapports malveillans du Contre-Amiral; et votre honorable caractére m’est 
un sur garanti du peu de crédit que doivent trouvér auprés de vous les pa- 
roles d’un homme qui, lorsqu’il a déserté Constantinople, ne s’est pas fait 
faute de répandre sur la Sublime Porte les calomnies dont Egypte est au- 
jourd’hui Pobjet de sa part. A l’époque ot les officiers de la flotte Otto- 
mane obtinrent la faculté de quitter Alexandrie, ce méme Contre-Amiral 
sollicita du Vice-Roi la permission de rester en Egypte. 


L 


74 


En dernier lieu encore, il eut sans difficulté recu de son Altesse l’auto- 
risation de se retirer, mais il a préféré la désertion 4 une démarche franche 
et honorable, parcequ’il a cru voir dans la désertion un moyen de se réta- 
blir. Il suffit de connaitre la conduite de cet officier pour apprécier a leur 
juste valeur des propos que je ne crois pas méme devoir réfuter. 

Les ordres de son Altesse ont déja prévenu vos intentions relativement 
4 la mise en liberté des Chefs Druses. Depuis longtems, plusieurs de ces 
Chefs avaient da quitter la Syrie et s’étaient fixés au Caire; 4 la nouvelle 
des derniers événemens ils sont venus. de leur propre mouvement réclamer 
de son Altesse la permission de se rendre au milieu de leurs compatriotes, 
pour y agir dans l’intérét de la cause Egyptienne, et il y a une dizaine de 
jours qu’ils ont pris la route de la Syrie. C’est a leur solicitation que les 
Chefs Druses qui avaient été précédemment exilés en Nubie, ont également 
été autorisés a rentrer dans leurs foyers, et que l’ordre de leur retour a déja 
été expédié. La réintégration de ces divers personnages dans leur patrie 
étant déja pour ainsi dire un fait accompli, vos bonnes dispositions a leur 
égard se trouvent réalisés sans qu’il soit besoin de recourir 4 un échange. 

Il était déjA venu a notre connaissance que l’intention des Grandes 
Puissances était de laisser 4 son Altesse le gouvernement héréditaire de 
V’Egypte, et sur ce point le Vice-Roi attend une communication officielle. 
Son Altesse n’est pas moins reconnaissante de la proposition contenue dans 
votre lettre, car elle y voit une manifestation personnelle de vos amicales et 
conciliantes dispositions. Dans aucun cas son Altesse n’a prétendu se 
mettre en opposition avec les volontées. des Grandes Puissances de I’Europe. 
Vous n’ignorez pas, M. le Commodore, qu’elle s’était déja soumise aux dis- 

ositions du Traité qui lui confére héréditairement V’administration de 
Pray pte. Son Altesse s’était seulement reserve de solliciter de la Sublime 
Porte la faculté de joindre a cette premiére concession le gouvernement 
viager de la Syrie, et cela parceque le Vice-Roi avait la conviction que, la 
Syrie entre ses mains pouvait encore offrir de grandes ressources a l’Empire 
Ottoman. Au lieu de répondre a cette demande on en est venu a des hos- 
tilités. Vous jugerez dans votre impartialité, M. le Commodore, si les torts 
ont été du cété du Vice-Roi. Son Altesse a la persuasion du contraire, et 
reste convaincue que les Grandes Puissances lui rendront justice. 

Pour ce qui concerne la restitution de la flotte Ottomane et l’évacuation 
de la Syrie, je m’empresse de répondre sur ces deux points.—I] n’a jamais 
été dans les intentions de son Altesse de retenir la flotte de son souverain, 
et elle n’a cessé de s’exprimer dans ce sens du jour méme que les circons- 
tances ont amené Vescadre du Grand Seigneur a Alexandrie. 

Il y a plus; lorsque Samy Bey a étégnvoyé en mission auprés de la 
Sublime Porte, il a offert au nom de son Altesse, la restitution de la flotte, 
qui était sur le point de mettre a la voile pour retourner 4 Constantinople, 
lorsque les hostilités commencées en Syrie sont venues ajourner l’exécution 
des ordres du Vice-Roi. Quant a l’évacuation de la Syrie, son Altesse 
avait cru étre en droit d’attendre de nouveaux ordres de la Sublime Porte. 
Vous savez, M. le Commodore, comment il a été répondu a la demande du 
Vice-Roi, qui, dés-lors, a cru devoir recourir A la médiation officieuse de la 
France, manifestant ainsi son intention d’entrer dans les voies de concilia- 
tion, et son désir de voir mettre un terme a un état de choses que son 
Altesse a la conscience de n’avoir pas provoqué. 

Pour le moment, les relations directes entre le Vice-Roi et le Général- 
en-chef de ’armée Egyptienne en Syrie sont suspendues par suite de Vagi- 
tation qui régne dans ce pays; c’est dans le but seul de faire cesser les 
désordres et pour assurer les voies de correspondance entre l’armée et 
’Egypte, que le Vice-Roi vient de diriger sur la frontiére un corps de 
troupes dont la mission est le rétablissement des communications. 

J’espére, M. le Commodore, que vous serez satisfait des explications 
que le Vice-Roi m’a ordonné de vous transmettre, et que vous reconnaitrez 
dans l’empressement que j’ai mis 4 répondre avec franchise a votre bien- 
veillante communication, une nouvelle preuve des dispositions pacifiques et 
conciliantes qui n’ont jamais cessé d’animer le Vice-Roi mon maitre. 

Je saisis, etc., 


(Signé) BOGHOS JOUSSOUF. 


75 


(Translation.) 


M. le Commodore, Alexandria, November 23, 1840. 


J HAVE received with much pleasure the letter which you have done 
me the honour to address to me, through my old friend Captain Maunsell, 
and I have lost no time in laying a translation of it before the Viceroy 
my master. 

His Highness commands me to acquaint you, that he is particularly 
sensible of the good feelings which are expressed in your above-mentioned 
letter of the 22nd instant. 

It seems to me impossible, M. le Commodore, that you should give 
credit to the malevolent reports of the Rear-Admiral: and your honourable 
character is acertain guarantee of the little credit which you will give to 
the words of a man, who, when he deserted from Constantinople, did not 
hesitate to shower upon the Sublime Porte the calumnies of which Egypt 
is now the object on his part. At the time when the officers of the 
Ottoman fleet got leave to quit Alexandria, this same Rear-Admiral 
solicited the Viceroy’s permission to remain in Egypt. 

Again, lately, he might without difficulty have received from his 
Highness permission to retire, but he preferred desertion to a frank 
and honourable proceeding, because he thought that he saw in desertion 
a means of re-establishing himself. It is enough to be aware of the 
conduct of this officer, to appreciate at their true value assertions which 
I do not even think I need refute. 

His Highness’s orders have already anticipated your intentions, with 
regard to setting the Druse Chieftains at liberty. Some time ago several 
of these Chieftains had quitted Syria and had fixed themselves at Cairo ; 
at the news of the late events they came, of their own accord, to demand 
his Highness’s permission to return among their countrymen, there to 
act in the interest of the Egyptian cause, and ten days ago they took the 
road for Syria. It is at their request that the Druse Chieftains, who had 
formerly been banished to Nubia, have been authorized to return to their 
homes, and that the order for their return has already been sent. The 
restoration of these different personages to their country being thus, as it 
may be said, a thing already done, your good intentions with regard to 
them are carried into effect, without its being necessary to have recourse 
to an exchange. 

It had already come to our knowledge that the intention of the Great 
Powers was to leave the hereditary government of Egypt to his Highness, 
and the Viceroy awaits an official communication upon this point. His 
Highness is not the less grateful for the proposal contained in your letter, 
for he sees therein a personal manifestation of your friendly and concili 
atory sentiments. In no case has his Highness intended to place 
himself in opposition to the will of the Great Powers of Europe. You are 
not ignorant, M. le Commodore, that he had already submitted to the 
stipulations of the T'reaty which grants to him the hereditary administra- 
tion of Egypt. His Highness had only reserved to himself the power of 
soliciting from the Sublime Porte the favour of joining the government of 
Syria for life to this first concession ; and this because the Viceroy was 
convinced that Syria in his hands might still furnish great resources to 
the Ottoman Empire. Instead of making any answer to this request, 
hostilities have been had recourse to. You will judge impartially, M. le 
Commodore, whether the faults have been on the side of the Viceroy. His 
Highness is persuaded of the contrary, and remains convinced that the 
Great Powers will do him justice. 

With regard to the restoration of the Ottoman fleet, and the evacua- 
tion of Syria, I hasten to reply on these two points. It has never entered 
into his Highness’s intentions to keep the fleet of his Sovereign, and he 
has not ceased to express himself in this sense from the very day that 
circumstances brought the fleet of the Grand Signor to Alexandria. 

Moreover, when Sami Bey was sent on a mission to the Sublime 
Porte, he offered, in the name of his Highness, the restitution of the fleet, 
which was on the point of purine. to sea to return to Constantinople 

2 


76 


when the hostilities begun in Syria postponed the execution of the orders 
of the Viceroy: With regard to the evacuation of Syria, his Highness 
thought himself justified in waiting for fresh orders from the Sublime 
Porte. You are aware, M. le Commodore, of the manner in which the 
request of the Viceroy was replied to, who thereupon thought it neces- 
sary to have recourse to the unofficial mediation of France, manifesting 
thereby his intention of entering upon the path of conciliation, and his 
desire to see an end put toa state of things, which his Highness is con- 
scious he did not give occasion for. 

The direct communications between the Viceroy and the Commander- 
in-Chief of the Egyptian army in Syria are for the moment suspended, in 
consequence of the agitation which exists in that country. It is with the 
sole object of putting a stop to the disorders, and of ensuring the means 
of correspondence between the army and Egypt, that the Viceroy has 
directed a body of troops to march upon the frontier, the object of whose 
mission is to re-establish the communications. 

I hope, M. le Commodore, that you will be satisfied with the explana- 
tions which the Viceroy has ordered me to transmit to you, and that you 
will perceive, in the eagerness which I have shown to reply with frankness 
to your friendly communication, a fresh proof of the pacific and conciliatory 
feelings which have never ceased to animate the Viceroy, my master. 

I avail myself, &c., 
(Signed) BOGHOS JOUSSOUF. 


Inclosure 4 in No. 86. 


Commodore Napier to Boghos Bey. 


. H.B.M. Ship “ Powerful,” 
Sir, Off Alexandria, November 24, 1840. 


-J HAVE to acknowledge the receipt of your Excellency’s letter, and 
am happy to find that the Emirs and Sheiks of Lebanon have been released, 
and if they are not all gone, I shall be glad to send them to Beyrout by sea. 

I have the honour of inclosing a copy of Lord Palmerston’s letter* 
to Lord Ponsonby, by which your Excellency will observe, that the desire 
of the Allied Powers is to reinstate his Highness in the hereditary govern- 
ment of Egypt, provided he at once evacuates Syria, and gives up the 
Ottoman fleet. 

It is of the utmost importance that my Government should be in- 
formed, by the packet about to leave Alexandria, of the intention of his 
Highness, in a clear and distinct manner. I have therefore to request your 
Excellency will at once inform me whether or not it is his Highness’s 
intention to give immediate orders for the surrendering the Ottoman fleet, 
and the evacuation of Syria? If his Highness consults his own interests 
he will not hesitate a moment. 

I shall give every assistance with the squadron, to prepare the Turkish 
fleet, and will permit any number of transports to proceed to Beyrout or 
Acre, to embark the army, who have now retired on Damascus, the intelli- 
gence of which I have this moment received from the Commander-in-chief. 

I beg you will inform his Highness that if he does not at once decide, 
should any expedition be sent from Constantinople, I have no discretionary 
power, and must act against him according to the best of my abilities. 

I observe with regret, by your letter, that more troops have already 
been sent into Syria, which I fear will be interpreted at Constantinople, 
into a determination of persisting in hostilities. 

To avoid all unnecessary delay, am now on board the steam boat, 
and shall be most happy to pay my respects to his Highness, should he 
wish to see me, and offer him any guarantee in my power. I beg, &c., 


(Signed) C. NAPIER. 


* October 15, 1840. 


ee ee ee a ee ee 


Inclosure 5 in No. 86. 


Commodore Napier to Boghos Bey. 


H.B.M. Ship, “ Medea,” 
Sir, Alexandria, November 25, 1840. 
I BEG leave to inclose the letter of Lord Palmerston to Lord Pon- 
sonby, which was by mistake not sent with my letter to your Excellency, 
yesterday. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER. 


Inclosure 6 in No. 86. 


Boghos Bey to Commodore Napier. 


M. le Commodore. - Alexandrie, le 24 Novembre, 1840. 


J’AI mis sous les yeux du Vice-Roi mon maitre la lettre que vous 
m’avez fait ’honneur de m’écrire sous la date de ce jour. 

Les Chefs Druses qui résidaient au Caire sont partis par terre pour la 
Syrie, ainsi que j’ai déja eu V’honneur de vous dire. I] n’est pas done 
possible @ son Altesse de profiter des moyens de transport que. vous mettez 
a leur disposition pour hater leur retour dans leur patrie. 

La copie de la lettre de son Excellence Lord Palmerston & Lord Pon- 
sonby n’était pas jointe 4 votre dépéche, ainsi que vous me l’annoncez. 

Je crois cependant, M. le Commodore, avoir connaissance du contenu 
de cette lettre, et c’est sur cela méme que je m’appuie pour considérer 
comme un fait non douteux le cousentement de son Altesse a la restitution 
de la flotte Ottomane et a l’évacuation de la Syrie; aussi puis-je vous certi- 
fier au nom du Vice-Roi, que l’escadre sera rendue et la Syrie évacuée aus- 
sit6t que son Altesse aura recu la garantie officielle et positive des avan- 
tages qui lui sont promis en retour de ses concessions. 

D’un autre cété, M. le Commodore, vous n’ignorez pas que les dépéches 
‘venues de France par le dernier bateau 4 vapeur nous ont fait connaitre 
que le Gouvernement Francais étant, sur la demande du Vice-Roi, entré en 
négociation avec les Quatre Puissances, on s’attendait 4 ce qu’un arrange- 
ment définitif aurait lieu sous peu de jours. Dans cette conjoncture, ne 
pensez-vous pas, M. le Commodore, qu’il y aurait convenance 4 ne pas an- 
ticiper sur la décision que vont prendre les Grandes Puissances agissant de 
concert avec la Sublime Porte,—décision a laquelle le Vice-Roi s’engage de 
la maniére la plus formelle 4 se soumettre sans délai. 

Vous semblez craindre que l’envoi d’un corps de troupes sur les fron- 
tiéres de Syrie ne soit considéré 4 Constantinople comme une preuve de 
Vintention qu’aurait son Altesse de prolonger les hostilités dans ce pays; 
c’est pour vous rassurer complétement sur ce point que je vous réitére l’as- 
surance positive que la colonne qui a été dirigée sur El-Arish en dernier 
lieu, n’a pas d’autre objet, d’autre mission, que d’assurer les voies de com- 
munication. 

Je vous réitére, etc., 


(Signé) BOGHOS JOUSSOUF. 


(Translation.) 


M. le Commodore, Alexandria, November 24, 1840. 


I HAVE laid before the Viceroy, my master, the letter which you 
have this day done me the honour to address to me. 

The Druse Chieftains who were residing at Cairo have departed for 
Syria by land, as I have already had the honour to state to you. It is 
not, therefore, in His Highness’s power to avail himself of the means of 


_ 


QE 


78 


transport which you place at their disposal to accelerate their return to 
their country. 

The copy of the letter from Lord Palmerston to Lord Ponsonby was 
not, as you state, inclosed in your despatch. 

I believe however, M. le Commodore, that I am aware of the contents 
of that letter, and it is upon them that I rely in considering as a fact not 
to be doubted, the consent of his Highness to restore the Ottoman fleet 
and to evacuate Syria; and J can assure you in the name of the Viceroy, 
that the fleet shall be restored and Syria evacuated as soon as his 
Highness shall have received the official and positive guarantee of the 
advantages which are promised him in return for these concessions. 

On another hand, you are not ignorant, M. le Commodore, that the 
despatches received from France by the last steam-boat have apprised us 
that the French Government, having entered into negotiation with the 
Four Powers at the request of the Viceroy, a definitive arrangement was 
expected to take place in a few days. In this posture of affairs do not 
you think, M. le Commodore, that it would be fitting not to anticipate 
the decision which the Great Powers, acting in concert with the Sublime 
Porte, are about to take ?—a decision which the Viceroy engages in the 
most formal manner to submit to without delay. 

You seem to fear that the sending of a body of troops upon the fron- 
tiers of Syria might be considered at Constantinople as a proof of the 
intention of his Highness to prolong hostilities in that country; it is in 
order to put you completely at ease upon this point that I repeat to you 
the positive assurance, that the column which has recently been sent 
towards El-Arish has no other object, no other destination, than to secure 
the means of communication. 

I repeat, &c., 
(Signed) BOGHOS JOUSSOUF. 


Inclosure 7 in No. 86. 
Commodore Napier to Boghos Bey. 


H. M. steam ship “ Medea,” 
Sir, Alexandria, November 25, 1840. 


Y WISH your Excellency to acquaint me whether in informing me 
that the Druse Chiefs had been sent back to Lebanon, your Excellency 
means that all the Chiefs that were removed from Syria last July, have 
returned to their homes. 

I observed to your Excellency in my letter of yesterday, that I had 
no direction to suspend hostilities by sea, unless his Highness would sur- 
render the fleet, and give immediate orders for the evacuation of Syria, 
much less can I insure the discontinuance of military operations; on the 
contrary, I feel perfectly satisfied that operations will be carried on, until 
orders are given for its complete evacuation. 

I am perfectly ignorant of the despatches brought by the last French 
steamer, nor have I any knowledge that the French Government has 
entered into negotiation with the Allied Powers. 

I only know that the Allied Powers have recommended to the Porte, 
to reinstate Mehemet Ali in the Government of Egypt, and render it here- 
ditary in his family; and I know that nothing could afford so much 
pleasure to the British Government, as my writing by this packet to say 
that orders have been given for the evacuation of Syria, and the surrender 
of the fleet. I can enter into his Highness’s feelings in hesitating to do 
this, until he officially receives the guarantee of the Allied Powers ; but at 
the same time I must do my duty. 

I am most anxious to avoid any further effusion of blood;—war and 
sickness have already done enough. 

Therefore, if his Highness will give immediate orders for the evacua- 
tion of Syria, and send transports to receive the troops, and get the fleet 
veady for sea, I will not insist on their departure for Constantinople, until 


79 


the Pasha is guaranteed in the hereditary government of Egypt, and on 
those conditions I will suspend hostilities. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER, 


Commodore. 


Inclosure 8 in No. 86. 


Boghos Bey to Commodore Napier. 


M. le Commodore, Alexandrie, le 25 Novembre, 1840. 


JE viens de recevoir la lettre que vous m’avez fait ’honneur de m/’a- 
dresser en date de ce jour, et je me suis empressé de la mettre sous les yeux 
du Vice-Roi mon maitre. Conformément a ses ordres, je réponds aux dif- 
férens paragraphes qu’elle renferme. 

En ce qui touche d’abord les Chefs Druses, je vous répéte, M. le Com- 
modore, que ceux d’entr’eux qui habitent le Caire sont partis par terre 
pour la Syrie; quant 4 ceux qui se trouvent encore en Nubie, l’ordre pour 
assurer leur retour a déja été expédié, ainsi que j’ai eu Vhonneur de vous 
Vécrire, et je vous réitére V’assurance qu’au moment de leur arrivée en 
Egypte ils seront entiérement libres de se rendre dans leur patrie. 

En ce qui concerne la flotte Ottomane, qui doit étre mise en état de 
faire voile aussit6t que la décision des Puissances lui sera officiellement 
notifiée, son Altesse voit avec plaisir que vous adhérez a ses sentimens. 

Son Altesse, partageant avec sincérité le désir que vous émettez d’arré- 
ter Veffusion de sang, s’est décidée a mettre fin aux hostilités; mais comme 
vous n’ignorez pas que le transport par mer d’une armée qui entraine une 
suite considérable, en matériel, en chevaux et équipages, offre de grandes 
difficultés, et qu’il est surtout urgent de mettre un terme aux malheurs de 
la guerre, le Vice-Roi est prét 4 ordonner a son fils Ibrahim Pacha de con- 
centrer ses troupes pour se replier avec elles sur ’ Egypte,—disposition qui 
sera transmise au Général-en-chef par un officier Egyptien accompagné, si 
vous le jugez convenable, par un officier Anglais accrédité par vous. 

Ibrahim Pacha se trouvera par ce moyen en mesure d’évacuer com-: 
plétement la Syrie au moment que la décision des Puissances sera officielle-- 
ment connue. 

J’ai ’honneur, etc., 


(Signd) BOGHOS JOUSSOUF. 


(Translation.) 


M le Commodore, Alexandria, November 25, 1840 


I HAVE just. received the letter which you have this day done me 
the honour to address to me, and I have hastened to lay it before the 
Viceroy my master. Agreeably to his orders, I reply to the different 
paragraphs contained in it. Peay 

In the first place, with regard to the Druse Chieftains, I repeat to 
you, M. le Commodore, that. those among them who live at Cairo, have 
set out for Syria by land; with regard to those who are still in Nubia, 
the order to secure their return has already been forwarded, as I had the 
honour to write to you, and I repeat to you the assurance that the moment 
they arrive in Egypt, they will be perfectly free to proceed to their 
own country. i 

With regard to the Ottoman fleet, which is to be put into a fit condi- 
tion for sailing, as soon as the decision of the Powers shall have been 
officially notified to the Viceroy, his Highness sees with pleasure that you 
concur in his sentiments. 

His Highness, sincerely participating in the wish which you express 
to put a stop to the shedding of blood, has decided to put an end to hos- 
tilities ; but as you are not ignorant that the transport by sea of an army 
which has a large quantity of stores, horses, and camp equipage, presents 


80 


great difficulties, and that it is above all important to put an end to the 
calamites of war, the Viceroy is ready to order his son Ibrahim Pasha to 
concentrate his troops in order to fall back with them upon Egypt,—an 
order which shall be transmitted to the Commander-in-Chief by an 
Egyptian officer, accompanied, if you think fit, by am English officer 
accredited by you. 
By this means, Ibrahim Pasha will be enabled completely to evacuate 
Syria the moment the decision of the Powers shall be officially known. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) BOGHOS JOUSSOUF, 


Inclosure 9 in No. 86. 


Commodore Napier to Boghos Bey. 


HI. M. steam ship “Medea,” 
Sir, Alexandria, November 26, 1840. 


IN the last paragraph of your letter of yesterday’s date, you say that 
the Pasha will give orders to concentrate the Egyptian army in Syria, in 
order that they may evacuate the country, when the decision of the Powers 
is officially known. 

I beg to observe to your Excellency that the Egyptian troops are 
already concentrated, and my demand is, that the order should be given for 
the immediate evacuation; and I shall place a steamer at your Excellency’s 
disposal to convey the officer whom the Pasha sends, together with one I 
ae appoint, to Beyrout, with the Pasha’s despatches to his son Ibrahim 

asha. 

Nothing short of this will either meet the Commander-in-chief’s 
approbation, or put an end to hostilities. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) | CHARLES NAPIER, 
Commodore. 


* Inclosure 10 in No. 86. 


Boghos Bey to Commodore Napier. 


M. le Commodore, Alexandrie, le 26 Novembre, 1840. 


JE reponds a la derniére lettre que vous m’avez fait ’honneur de m’a- 
dresser, et que j’ai soumise au Vice-Roi mon maitre. 

Son Altesse consent 4 réarmer la flotte de la Sublime Porte, 4 l’appro- 
visionner, en un mot, a la mettre en état de faire voile au premier moment 
pour Constantinople, sous la condition expresse, et que vous-méme avez 
posée, que la dite escadre restera dans notre port jusqu’a la notification 
officielle des Puissances qui assure 4 son Altesse le gouvernement héré- 
ditaire de Egypte. 

En outre, Monsieur, sur la demande formelle que vous en avez faite au 
Vice-Roi, son Altesse enverra a Beyrouth, et cela au plus prochain jour, 
un officier de son palais (déja nommé) porteur des ordres nécessaires & 
V’évacuation de la Syrie par Ibrahim Pacha son fils et toute son armée. 

Cet envoyé prendra passage 4 bord du bateau.4 vapeur que vous avez 
mis 4 la disposition de son Altesse, et sera accompagné par un officier 
Anglais jusqu’a destination et retour. 

Ceci est écrit avec une vive gratitude de vos soins et de votre délica- 
tesse dans la solution de cet épineux différend. Et au nom de son Altesse, 

Je suis, etc., 


(Signé) ° BOGHOS JOUSSOUF. 


* The copy of this letter is printed from the “Journal des Débats,” of the 15th of December, 
1840, but Commodore Napier has stated that he never received the original letter. 


81 


(Translation.) 


M. le Commodore, Alexandria, November 26, 1840. 


I REPLY to the last letter which you have done me the honour to 
address to me, and which I have laid before the Viceroy my master. 

His Highness consents to re-equip the fleet of the Sublime Porte, to 
victual it, in a word to put it in a state to sail at a moment’s notice for 
Constantinople, on the express condition,—a condition which you yourself 
have laid down,—that the said fleet shall remain in our port until the 
official notification of the Powers which shall guarantee the hereditary 
government of Egypt to his Highness. 

Besides this, on the formal demand which you have made to the 
Viceroy thereupon, his Highness will send to Beyrout, and that forthwith, 
an officer of his household, (already appointed,) who will be the bearer of 
the necessary orders for the evacuation of Syria by his son Ibrahim 
Pasha and his whole army. 

This Envoy will embark on board the steamer which you have placed 
at his Highness’s disposal, and will be accompanied by an English 
officer, on his way there, and back again. 

This is written with lively gratitude for the care and the delicacy you 
have shown in the solution of this difficult question. And in the name of 
his Highness, : 

Iam, &c. 


(Signed) BOGHOS JOUSSOUF. 


No. 87. 
Sir John Barrow to Lord Leveson. 


My Lord, Admiralty, December 15, 1840. 


WITH reference to my letter to your Lordship of the 14th instant, trans- 
mitting copies of the correspondence which had taken place between Commodore 
Sir Charles Napier and the Egyptian Government, I am commanded by my 
Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to send you herewith, for the information 
of Viscount Palmerston, copies of a further letter from the Commodore and its 
inclosures, containing a copy of the Convention, signed by himself and the 
Minister of Mehemet Ali. 

Iam, &c., 
(Signed) JOHN BARROW. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 87. 


Commodore Napier to R. More O’Ferrall, Esq. 


Her Majesty's Steam-vessel ‘‘ Medea,” 
Sir, Alexandria, November 28, 1840. 


IN my letter by the ‘‘ Oriental,” I sent the copies of the correspondence 
that has taken place between the Egyptian Government and myself. I also 
acquainted you that the terms had been agreed to. 

I have now the honour of inclosing a copy of the Convention I have signed, 
which I trust will meet their Lordships’ approbation. The whole of the corre- 
spondence has been also sent to the Commander-in-Chief; and the Egyptian 
officer, with the order to Ibrahim Pasha, has also proceeded to join him. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER, 


Commodore. 


P.S.—I beg to observe that I am much indebted to the decision of Captain 
Maunsell of the ‘* Rodney,”’ in opening a direct communication with the Pasha. 
It had been usual to send in letters by the French boat, but Captain Maunsell very 
properly landed at the palace, and sent right up to the Pasha at once. 


M 


82 


Inclosure 2 in No. 87. 


CONVENTION between Commodore Napier, commanding Her Britannic 
Majesty’s Naval Forces before Alexandria, on the one part, and 
his Excellency Boghos Joussouf Bey, specially authorized by his 
Highness the Viceroy of Egypt, on the other part; signed at Alexan- 
dria, the 27th November, 1840, 


ART. I. 


Le Commodore Napier, en sa qualité susdite, ayant porté a la connais- 
sance de son Altesse Méhémet Ali, que les Puissances Alliées avaient recom- 
mandé a la Sublime Porte de le réintégrer dans le gouvernement héréditaire 
de Egypte, et son Altesse voyant dans cette communication une circon- 
stance favorable pour mettre un terme aux calamités de la guerre, elle 
s’engage a ordonner 4 son fils Ibrahim Pacha de procéder a l’évacuation 
immédiate de la Syrie. Son Altesse s’engage, en outre, 4 restituer la flotte 
Ottomane aussitét qu’elle aura recu la notification officielle que la Sublime 
Porte lui accorde le gouvernement héréditaire de l’Egypte, laquelle con- 
cession est et demeure garantie par les Puissances. 


ART. II. 


Le Commodore Napier mettra a la disposition du Gouvernement Egyp- 
tien un bateau 4 vapeur pour conduire en Syrie Vofficier désigné par son 
Altesse pour porter au Général-en-chef de Varmée Egyptienne Vordre 
d’évacuer la Syrie. Le Commandant-en-chef des forces Britanniques, Sir R. 
Stopford, nommera de son coté un officier pour veiller 4 l’exécution de cette 
mesure. 


ART. III. 


En considération de ce qui précéde, le Commodore Napier s’engage 4 
suspendre de la part des forces Britanniques les hostilités contre Alexan- 
drie ou toute autre portion du territoire Egyptien. Il autorisera en méme 
temps la libre navigation des batimens destinés au transport des blessés, 
des invalides ou de toute autre portion de ’armée Egyptienne, que le Gou- 
vernement de l’Egypte désirerait faire rentrer dans ce pays par la voie de 
mer. 


ART. IV. 


Il est bien entendu que l’armée Egyptienne aura la faculté de se retirer 
de la Syrie avec son artillerie, ses armes, ses chevaux, munitions, bagages, 
et en général tout ce qui constitue le matériel de ’armée. 

Fait 4 double, dont un original pour chaque Partie Contractante. 


(Signé) CH. NAPIER, Commodore. 
BOGHOS JOUSSOUF. 


(Translation.) 
ART, I. 


COMMODORE NAPIER, in his above-mentioned capacity, having 
brought to the knowledge of his Highness Mehemet Ali, that the Allied 
Powers had recommended the Sublime Porte to reinstate him in the here- 
ditary government of Egypt, and his Highness seeing in this communi- 
cation a favourable occasion for putting an end to the calamities of war, 
he engages to order his son Ibrahim Pasha to proceed immediately to 


85 


the evacuation of Syria. His Highness engages, moreover, to restore the 
Ottoman fleet, as soon as he shall have received the official notification 
that the Sublime Porte grants to him the hereditary government of 
Egypt, which concession is, and remains, guaranteed by the Powers. 


ART. I. 


Commodore Napier will place a steamer at the disposal of the 
Egyptian Government, which will convey to Syria the officer charged by 
his Highness to carry to the Commander-in-Chief of the Egyptian army 
the order to evacuate Syria. The Commander-in-Chief of the British 
Forces, Sir Robert Stopford, will on his side appoint .an officer to watch 
over the execution of this measure. 


ART. Il. 


In consideration of what precedes, Commodore Napier engages to 
suspend hostilities on the part of the British forces against Alexandria, 
or any other portion of the Egyptian territory. He will, at the same 
time, authorize the free passage of the vessels appointed for the trans- 
port of the wounded, the invalids, or of any other portion of the 


Egyptian Army, which the Government of Egypt might wish to return to 
that country by sea. 


ART. IV. 


It is well understood that the Egyptian Army shall have the liberty 
of retiring from Syria with its artillery, arms, horses, ammunition, bag- 
gage, and in general everything that constitutes the stores of an army. 

Done in duplicate, each Contracting Party to have an original. 

(Signed) CH. NAPIER, Commodore. 
BOGHOS JOUSSOUF. 


Inclosure 3 in No. 87. 


Commodore Napier to Boghos Bey. 


Sir, H.M.S. “ Medea,’ November 27, 1840. 

IN the Convention entered into by your Excellency and myself, Mehe- 
met Ali is styled his Highness the Viceroy of Egypt. As this does not 
alter the spirit of the Convention, I did not hesitate to sign it, but you 
must clearly understand that I cannot acknowledge that title until Mehemet 
Ali is restored by the Porte. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER, 
Commodore. 


ee prea ne eR RS PE cA CE ASR SS SSP TE TCS 2 SE TE TE LI OS 


No. 88. 
Mr. Bloomfield to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received December 15.) 


(Extract.) ag Petersburgh, December 1, 1840. 

ACCOUNTS of the occupation of St. Jean d’Acre were received by Count 
Nesselrode on the 23rd ultimo. His Excellency immediately informed me of 
this glorious success, and read to me on the following day his reports from the 
Levant. Kt 

His congratulations on the fresh laurels gained by the British Navy were 
most enthusiastic; and his Excellency assured me that the energy and prompti- 
tude with which the operations of the Allied Forces had been conducted had 
given the highest satisfaction to the Emperor. This language was echoed by all 

M 2 


84 


the Court for several days, and the Imperial Government are sincerely rejoiced at 
the favourable turn which the Eastern Question is assuming. 

The bombardment of St. Jean d’Acre was announced on Tuesday last in 
the “Journal de St. Pétersbourg;” and your Lordship may judge, from the 
inclosed extract, of the impression received at Court, and of the feelings on this 
subject, which the Government wished to convey. 

Count Nesselrode has informed me that he despatches M. de Berg, 
Secretary to the Russian Embassy in London, to-night, who is the bearer of the 
second class of the order of St. George, which the Emperor forwards for 
Admiral Sir Robert Stopford, as a proof of His Imperial Majesty’s satisfaction 
with the manner in which he has conducted the operations confided to hin, 
trusting that Her Majesty will be graciously pleased to permit him to 
wear it. 

The third class of the same distinguished order is forwarded for Captain 
Napier, whose conduct and gallantry have excited the greatest admiration in this 
country. 

His Imperial Majesty has sent the Order of St. Andrew to the Archduke 
Frederick. 


Inclosure in No. 88. 


Extract from the “ St. Petersburgh Journal,” respecting the capture of 
St. Jean d’ Acre. 


POST-SCRIPTUM. 
PRISE DE SAINT JEAN D’ACRE. 


UNE estafette arrivée dans la soirée de Constantinople a apporté des 
dépéches de cette capitale du 11 Novembre, nouveau style, et de Beyrouth, du 6 
Novembre. On venait d’y recevoir l’importante nouvelle de la prise de Saint 
Jean d’Acre, qui a eu lieu le 4 Novembre, aprés un bombardement de douze 
heures, pendant lequel quarante mille projectiles ont été lancés dans la forteresse. 
Lexplosion d’un magasin 4 poudre ayant fait éprouver des pertes considérables & 
la garnison, qui consistait en 6,500 hommes de troupes Egyptiennes, leurs débris 
ont évacué la place et se sont sauvés dans la direction de Jaffa, poursuivis par les 
Arabes de Naplouse, qui venaient de prendre a leur tour les armes en faveur du 
Sultan. L’Archiduc Frédéric d’Autriche a pris une grande part a ce beau fait 
d’armes. Son Altesse Impériale a le premier planté le drapeau du Sultan sur 
les murs de Saint Jean d’Acre. 


(Translation.) 
POSTSCRIPT. 
CAPTURE OF ST. JEAN D’ACRE. 


AN Estafette which arrived in the evening from Constantinople has 
brought despatches from that capital, of the 11th of November, New Style, 
and from Beyrout of the 6th of November. They had just received there the 
important news of the capture of St. Jean d’Acre, which took place on the 
4th of November, after a bombardment of twelve hours, during which 40,000 
projectiles were thrown into the fortress. The explosion of a powder 
magazine having caused considerable loss to the garrison, which consisted of 
6,500: Egyptian troops, the remainder of them evacuated the place and fled 
towards Jaffa, pursued by the Arabs of Naplouse, who have taken up arms 
in their turn in favour of the Sultan. The Archduke Frederic of Austria has 
taken a distinguished part in this brilliant military action. His Imperial 
Highness was the first to plant the standard of the Sultan on the walls of 
St. Jean d’Acre. ' 


SSS sshstessasasersieusssssestenessaste 


No. 89. 


Mr. Bloomfield to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received December 153) 


(Extract.) St. Petersburgh, December 1, 1840. 

COUNT NESSELRODE has received despatches from London and 
Constantinople to the 17th ultimo. 

I called on his Excellency yesterday, and he allowed me to read Baron 
Brunnow’s last reports, giving a detailed account of the late meeting of the 
Plenipotentiaries, and inclosing your Lordship’s letters to the Lords of the 
Admiralty of the 14th ultimo. 

Count Nesselrode said that he entirely approved of the plan, suggested by 
Baron Brunnow, of making a direct communication at Alexandria, through one 
of the officers of Her Majesty’s Fleet, and that in consequence of our success at 
St. Jean d’Acre, and the instructions which he was informed were to be sent 
by M. Guizot to M. Cochelet, he hoped Mehemet Ali would see the folly of 
attempting to offer further resistance to the fulfilment of the Convention of July, 
and that he would thus facilitate the termination of the question, by throwing 
himself on the mediation of the Allies with the Porte. 

Count Nesselrode told me that he had no fresh instructions to send to 
London on the subject, but that he should convey the Emperor's entire appro- 
bation to Baron Brunnow of his conduct and language, and express his 
confidence in the wisdom of Her Majesty’s Government to adopt from time to 
time any measures which may become advisable. 


No. 90. 


Count Nesselrode to Baron Brunnow.—(Communicated by Baron Brunnow, 
December 15.) 


M. le Baron. St. Pétersbourg, le 4S", 1840. 


LE Secrétaire d’Ambassade de Berg, retournant aujourd’hui a son poste a 
Londres, je profite de son départ, pour accuser votre Excellence la réception 
de ses rapports du 3°; Novembre. Is ont été immédiatement soumis a Sa Ma- 
jesté ’Empereur et ont meérité sa plus compléte approbation. Notre auguste 
Maitre a particuli¢rement honoré de son suffrage la resolution adoptée 4 Londres, 
de faire déclarer & Méhémet Ali par l’Amiral Stopford, que s’il se soumet au 
Sultan et s’engage a retirer ses troupes d’ Adana, de la Syrie entiére, de |’Arabie 
et de Candie, et s'il restitue la flotte Ottomane, en ce cas.les Quatre Puissances 
useront de leur influence 4 Constantinople, pour engager la Porte a le relever de 
sa déchéance et a l’installer de nouveau dans le Pachalic d’Egypte. Cette com- 
binaison dont votre Excellence a concerté le plan avec Lord Palmerston, léve 
toutes les difficultés, et tend 4 hater la solution finale de Ja crise actuelle par un 
arrangement honorable et conforme aux engagemens que nous avons pris. Les 
considérations développées dans le mémorandum rédigé pour l’exposition de ce 
plan, les instructions a l’Amiral Stopford qui y sont annexées, l’ordre qui lui a 
été intimé de ne suspendre en rien les hostilités pendant que la sommation sera 
faite 4 Alexandrie, les recommandations particuliéres données a J’officier de 
marine chargé de porter le message des Puissances 4 Méhémet Ali, toutes ces 
dispositions, M. le Baron, ont été approuvées sans réserve par Sa Majesté 
]’ Empereur. 

Recevez, &c., 
(Signe) NESSELRODE. 


(Translation.) 
M. le Baron, St. Petersburgh, “-y 1840. 


THE Secretary of Embassy de Berg, being about to return to his post in 
London,.I avail myself of his departure to acknowledge the receipt of your 
Excellency’s reports of the 35th of November. They were immediately sub- 
mitted to His Majesty the Emperor, and merited his fullest approbation. Our 


86 


august Master particularly honoured with his approbation the resolution 
adopted in London, that it should be declared to Mehemet Ali by Admiral 
Stopford, that if he submits to the Sultan and engages to withdraw his troops 
from Adana, from the whole of Syria, from Arabia, and from Candia, and if 
he restores the Ottoman fleet, in that case the Four Powers will use their 
influence at Constantinople to induce the Porte to relieve him from his depri- 
vation and to reinstate him in the Pashalic of Egypt. This plan which your 
Excellency concerted with Lord Palmerston, removes every difficulty, and 
tends to hasten the final solution of the present crisis by an arrangement 
honourable and conformable to the engagements which we have entered 
into. The considerations set forth in the Memorandum drawn up in expla- 
nation of this plan, the instructions to Admiral Stopford which are annexed 
thereto, the orders which have been given to him not at all to suspend hos- 
tilities while the summons is being made at Alexandria, the private instruc- 
tions given to the naval officer charged to convey the message of the Powers 
to Mehemet Ali, all these arrangements, M. le Baron, are approved without 
exception by His Majesty the Emperor. 
Accept &c., 
(Signed) NESSELRODE. 


No. 91. 


Count Nesselrode to Baron Brunnow.—(Communicated by Baron Brunnow, 
December 15.) 


Monsieur le Baron, St. Pétersbourg, le 4522 1840. 


A LA premiére nouvelle que nous avons recue ici de la prise de St. Jean 
d’Acre, je me suis immédiatement empressé d’informer votre Excellence de la 
vive satisfaction avec laquelle l’Empereur avait accueilli cet événement, ot Sa 
Majesté s’était plue 4 reconnaitre le fruit de la marche active et persévérante 
qu’a svivie Je Ministtre Anglais depuis la conclusion du Traité de Londres. 
Indépendamment des sentimens qu’a cette occasion, M. le Baron, vous avez déja 
été chargé d’exprimer au Principal Secrétaire d’Etat, notre auguste Maitre a 
senti encore le besoin de féliciter lui-méme la Reine d’un résultat si glorieux 
pour la marine Britannique, si décisif pour le succés final de la cause que |’ Angle- 
terre et la Russie sont appelées a soutenir ensemble. Tel est le but de la lettre 
ci-jointe, en original et en copie, que l’Empereur adresse 4 son auguste Amie et 
Alliée. Désirant par la méme occasion lui temoigner toute son estime pour la 
belle conduite qu’ont tenue l’Amiral Stopford et le Commodore Napier, |’ Em- 
pereur met pour eux a sa disposition la Croix de St. Georges de la seconde et de 
la troisiéme classe. Veuillez, M. le Baron. en remettre 4 Lord Palmerston les 
insignes également ci-annexées, en le priant de faire parvenir a sa haute desti- 
nation la lettre de Cabinet qui les accompagne. Le Ministére Anglais verra, nous 
n’en doutons pas, dans ce juste hommage rendu a la bravoure des deux marins, 
une nouvelle preuve de la part désinteressée que nous prenons a la gloire de nos 
Allies, et de la sincérité de notre zéle pour le triompke de notre commune 
politique. 

Recevez, &c., 


(Signe) NESSELRODE., 
(Translation.) 
M. le Baron, St. Petersburg, 5 Now, 1840. 


ON the first intelligence which we received here of the capture of St. 
Jean d’Acre, I immediately hastened to inform your Excellency of the lively 
satisfaction with which the Emperor had welcomed that event, in which His 
Majesty was pleased to recognize the fruit of the active and persevering 
course which the English Government has pursued since the conclusion of 
the Treaty of London. Independently of the sentiments which you have 
already been instructed, M. le Baron, to express on this occasion to the Prin- 
cipal Secretary of State, our august Master has also felt it necessary himself 


slat) eke it ee ee ee ee re re ae 
q “A rs ia 


87 


to congratulate the Queen upon a result so glorious for the British navy, so 
decisive for the final success of the cause which England and Russia are called 
upon to support together. This is the object of the letter, inclosed in original 
and in copy, which the Emperor addresses to His august Friend and Ally. 
Being desirous by the same opportunity to testify to Her his full estimation of 
the admirable conduct of Admiral Stopford and of Commodore Napier, the 
Emperor places at Her disposal, for them, the Cross of St. George of the 
second and of the third class. Have the goodness, M. le Baron, to deliver to 
Lord Palmerston the Insignia thereof, which are likewise transmitted here- 
with, requesting him to convey to its high destination the Cabinet letter 
which accompanies them. The English Government will perceive, we do not 
doubt, in the just homage thus paid to the bravery of the two sailors, a fresh 
proof of the disinterested manner in which we participate in the glory of our 
Allies, and of the sincerity of our zeal for the triumph of our common policy. 
Accept, &c., 
(Signed) NESSELRODE. 


No. 92. 
Viscount Palmerston to the Lords of the Admiralty. 


My Lords, Foreign Office, December 15, 1840. 


I HAVE had under my consideration the letter of your Lordships’ 
Secretary of yesterday’s date, inclosing a copy of a despatch from Commodore 
Napier, dated the 26th of November, with copies of that officer’s correspondence 
with Boghos Bey; and also the further despatch from Commodore Napier of the 
28th of November, which has been communicated to me by your Lordships this 
day, inclosing the Articles of Agreement signed by Commodore Napier and 
Boghos Bey, on the 27th of November. 

I have to request your Lordships to convey to Commodore Napier the 
approval of Her Majesty’s Government of the steps taken by him on this occa- 
sion, though without any instructions to that effect, and upon his own respon- 
sibility, to carry into execution the arrangements contemplated by the Treaty of 
the 15th of July, and to put an end to the contest in the Levant. 

But the instruction given by your Lordships to Sir Robert Stopford in 
pursuance of my letter of the 14th of November, will have reached Sir Robert 
Stopford a few days after he received from Commodore Napier a report of the 
result of his negotiation at Alexandria; and it is uncertain whether Sir Robert 
Stopford will have considered the instruction of the 14th of November as 
superseding Commodore Napier’s arrangement, or whether he will have looked 
upon Commodore Napier’s arrangement as superseding that instruction. 

In this state of things, Her Majesty’s Government must postpone a final 
communication with respect to the arrangement made by Commodore Napier, 
till they learn, as they probably will in a few days’ time, what course Sir Robert 
Stopford took upon the receipt of the instruction of the 14th of November. 
But there is one part of the Articles signed by Commodore Napier and Boghos 
Bey, upon which it is necessary that an instruction should immediately be sent 
to Sir Robert Stopford. 

In the First Article, Boghos Bey, on the part of Mehemet Ali, takes two 
engagements: the one is to order the Egyptian troops to evacuate Syria; the 
other is to restore the Turkish fleet. The first engagement was to be fulfilled 
immediately, and was to be conditional only upon the promise of Commodore 
Napier that he would, in his capacity of Commander of the British fleet before 
Alexandria, suspend hostilities against Alexandria, and every other. part of the 
Egyptian territory. The other engagement was eventual, and was to be fulfilled 
as soon as Mehemet Ali should have received an official notification that the 
Porte grants him the hereditary government of Egypt, and that this concession 
is, and shall continue to be, under the guarantee of the Four Powers. Now it 
is necessary that Sir Robert Stopford should lose no time in making known to 
Mehemet Ali that this last demand of his, that the Four Powers should guarantee 
to him the grant of the hereditary government of Egypt, if that grant should 
be made to him by the Sultan, cannot be complied with. 


88 


In the first place, as far as Great Britain is concerned, it would be incon- | 


sistent with the principles which guide the conduct of the British Government 
to guarantee to a subject a grant of administrative authority made to him by his 
Sovereign within the dominions of that Sovereign; and, in the next place, as 
regards the Four Powers, one of the main objects which those Powers had in 
view in concluding the Treaty of the 15th of July, was to uphold and secure the 
independence of the Sultan’s Throne. But it is obvious that such a standing 
interference by the Four Powers in the internal affairs of the Turkish Empire, as 
would be implied by the guarantee demanded by Mehemet Ali, would be incon- 
sistent with that independence, and would, as far as the province of Egypt is 
concerned, tend essentially to impair it. For these reasons, neither Great 
Britain singly nor the Four Powers jointly, can give the guarantee demanded by 
Mehemet Ali. 

That which the Four Powers will do, is to recommend to the Porte to make 
the concession specified in the communication which Sir Robert Stopford has 
been instructed to convey to Mchemet Ali. 

I am, &c., 


(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 93. 


Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, December 17, 1840. 


HER Majesty’s Government have received from Commodore Napier a 
copy of the Articles of Agreement concluded between him and Boghos Bey, 
on the 27th of November, by which Boghos Bey engaged, on the part of 
Mehemet Ali, that the Egyptian troops should immediately evacuate Syria, 
on condition that Commodore Napier should suspend hostilities against 
Egypt, and that the Turkish fleet should be given up by Mehemet Ali, as 
soon as Mehemet Ali should be informed from Constantinople, that the 
Sultan had granted him the hereditary government of Egypt, and provided 
that grant were guaranteed to Mehemet Ali by the Four Powers. 

As these Articles of Agreement will have reached Sir Robert Stopford 
much about the same time as the instruction sent to him by the Lords of the 
Admiralty on the 14th of November, it is doubtful which of the two Sir 
Robert may have determined to act upon; and whether he will have consi- 
dered the instruction of the 14th of November as superseding the Articles of 
Agreement, or the Articles of Agreement as superseding the instruction. 

If Sir Robert Stopford has taken the first course, and has sent a commu- 
nication to Mehemet Ali, in pursuance of the instruction of the 14th of 
November, there can be no doubt that Mehemet Ali will have consented to 
do what was required of him by that instruction ; and in that case Sir Robert 
Stopford will have transmitted Mehemet Ali’s acquiescence to Constantinople; 
and then your Excellency and your Colleagues will, of course, have given to 
the Porte the advice specified in my despatch of the 15th of October 
to your Excellency ; and your Excellency will before this, have sent off to 
this office a report of the decision of the Porte, which has, no doubt, been in 
conformity with the advice so given. 

But if Sir Robert Stopford has taken the second course, and has looked 
upon the Articles of Agreement of the 27th of November as superseding ‘the 
instruction of the 14th of November, he will in that case have sent ‘those 
Articles of Agreement to Constantinople, as being virtually equivalent to the 
written engagement required from Mehemet Ali by the instruction of the 14th 
of November. 

In that case, however, a doubt may have been felt by your Ex 
and your Colleagues what steps you should take in aries of the re 
tions contained in my despatch of the 15th of October, andin the corresponding 
instructions sent from Vienna, Petersburgh, and Berlin ; because those instruc- 
tions, modified by the subsequent letter to the Admiralty of November 14, con- 
templated the unconditional submission of Mehemet Ali to the Sultan "ag a 
preliminary to the advice to be given to the Porte to reinstate Mehemet Ali in 
the Government of Egypt; and, on the contrary, Mehemet Ali, in the 


at ee 


89 


demands which he sets forth in the first Article of the Agreement, signed on 
the 27th of November, engages to restore the fleet only on ,two conditions,— 
the one being, that the Sultan should grant him hereditary tenure in the 
Government of Egypt,—and the other being, that such grant on the part of 
the Sultan should be placed under the guarantee of the Four Powers. 

It appears to Her Majesty’s Government that the fact that Mehemet Ali 
attached the first of these conditions to his restoration of the fleet, need not 
prevent the Porte from making to him that concession. For, in fact, those 
Articles of Agreement were substantially a complete surrender on the part of 
Mehemet Ali; and he was led to suppose, that in asking for hereditary 
tenure, he was only asking that which the Porte was willing to give. But 
the second condition, namely, the guarantee of the Four Powers, is one which 
cannot be complied with; and your Excellency should, on this point, give 
to the Porte the same explanations which Sir Robert Stopford has been 
instructed, in pursuance of my letter to the Admiralty of the 15th instant, 
to give to Mehemet Ali. 

It has been reported, but upon what authority is not known, that the 
Porte was, towards the end of November, but before it had heard of the 
submission of Mehemet Ali, disinclined to revoke the decree which had 
deprived him of the Government of Egypt. It is not unnatural that such a 
feeling should have existed at that time in the mind of the Turkish Govern- 
ment, but Her Majesty’s Government hope that subsequent events, and the 
unanimous advice of the Four Powers, will have removed these objections on 
the part of the Porte, and will have led the Porte to accept the settlement 
effected by Commodore Napier’s arrangement, or by the subsequent more 
ample submission of Mehemet Ali. 

It would indeed be necessary, that, in reinstating Mehemet Ali in the 
Pashalic of Egypt, care should be taken to make such arrangements as would 
protect the people of Egypt from a continuance of the tyrannical oppression 
by which they have of late years been crushed, and should secure the Sultan 
against a renewal of those hostilities which have compelled him to have 
recourse to the aid of his Allies. But the means of effecting all these pur- 
poses may be found in the stipulations of the Treaty of the 15th of July, 
without removing Mehemet Ali from his Pashalic. The Treaty says, that all 
the laws of the Turkish Empire, and all the greaties of the Porte, shall apply 
to Egypt, just as much as to any other province of the Sultan’s dominions ; 
and that the Jand and sea forces which may be maintained by the Pasha of 
Egypt, shall be part of the forces of the Empire, and be kept up for the 
service of the State. 

Under these stipulations the Sultan will of course be able, by an exercise 
of his legislative authority, to establish unity of flag, and of military and 
naval uniform, throughout all his provinces; to limit the number of troops 
which each province shall, according to its population, maintain; to regulate 
the mode of enforcing the conscription, so as to protect the people from 
undue burthens and oppressive levies; to fix the number and class of ships 
of war which shall belong to the several naval ports of his dominions ; to. fix 
the manner in which commissions in the army and navy shall be granted in 
his name, and by his authority; to determine that a single monetary system 
shall prevail throughout all his dominions; and that there shall be but one 
mint. The Treaty specifies, that none but the legal imposts shall be levied 
in Egypt, which will secure the people from undue exactions; and the 
execution of the Convention of 1838, by which all monopolies are to be 
abolished, will at once free the industry of the people of Egypt from those 
oppressive restrictions which have hitherto kept the great mass of the 
population in the most abject poverty, and which have gradually thrown out 
of cultivation extensive tracts of land that were formerly tilled and 
productive. , 

By such means it seems to Her Majesty’s Government, that future 
security might be afforded both to the Sultan and to his Egyptian subjects 
against the disposition of Mehemet Ali again to rebel against his Sovereign, 
and to oppress the people of the province he would have to govern. , 

Jam, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


N 


90 


No, 94. 


Viscount Palmerston to Earl Granville. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, December 18, 1840. 


I INCLOSE for your Excellency’s information, and for communication 
to M. Guizot, a copy of a letter which I addressed, on the 15th instant, to the 
Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, signifying to their Lordships the Queen’s 
commands as to further instructions to be addressed to Admiral Sir Robert 
Stopford. 

Iam, 


&c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON 


* No. 95. 


Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received December 20.) 


My Lord, Paris, December 18, 1840. 


I RECEIVED yesterday your despatch of December 15, inclosing Commo- 
dore Napier’s despatch to your Lordship of the 26th of November, and his 
correspondence with Boghos Bey. 

I read with surprise, in the Commodore’s despatch, that a French steamer 
had arrived three days before at Alexandria with a Negotiator, who had joined 
with the other French Agents already established there, in endeavours to prevent 
the success of his negotiation with Mehemet Ali. ‘This statement is so at 
variance with M. Guizot’s repeated assurances that he had directed M. Cochelet to 
advise Mehemet Ali to accede to the proposal which Admiral Sir Robert Stopford 
was instructed to make to the Pasha, that I could not but conclude that either 
it must have reference to some person whose mission was unknown to M. Guizot, 
or that it was founded upon erroneous information furnished by Boghos Bey, or 
some other Egyptian Agent. I this day, in conversation with M. Guizot, 
alluded to this new Negotiator, who must have been sent to Alexandria since 
M. Thiers quitted office, and I must say that the unhesitating and unembarrassed 
manner in which he denied that he had sent any Agent whatever to Egypt, and 
the repetition of what he had before said to me in regard to the recall of Count 
Walewski, and his imstructions to M. Cochelet, fully confirmed my previous 
impressions. : 

I have an indistinct recollection of having heard at the time of the change 
of Ministry, that Marshal Soult proposed sending an officer to Egypt, and also 
that a French officer of the name of Beaufort, on whose representations of the 
force and efficiency of Ibrahim Pasha’s army M. Thiers placed great reliance, 
was to return to the Levant. Iwill not fail to make further inquiries on the 
subject. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) GRANVILLE, 


91 
No. 96. 


Viscount Palmerston to Earl Granville. . 


My Lord, Foreign Office, December 22, 1840. 
WITH reference to your despatch of the 18th instant, in which your 
Excellency reports that M. Guizot denies having sent any Agent whatever to 
Alexandria, 1 have to acquaint your Excellency that I read to Baron de Bour- 
queney, last week, Commodore Napier’s letter, and drew his attention to that 
passage which states the arrival of a new French Negotiator, who, in conjunction 
with M. Cochelet and Count Walewski, had endeavoured to prevent the 
arrangement which Commodore Napier was trying to effect; and Baron de 
- Bourqueney said thereupon that he could not believe the latter part of the 
statement, because the person to whom Commodore Napier alluded, as having 
recently arrived, must have been M. de Beaufort, who, Baron de Bourqueney 
said, had been sent to Alexandria by M. Guizot immediately on his coming into 
office. Baron de Bourqueney further said that he could not think that M. de 
Beaufort had acted in a manner so contrary to M. Guizot’s intentions. 
It may be that Baron de Bourqueney was mistaken as to the time when 
M. de Beaufort was sent from Paris, and that M. de Beaufort was sent off by 
M. Thiers, and not by M. Guizot ; but it would be desirable that your Excellency 
should ascertain when M. de Beaufort went, and by whom he was sent. 
I am, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 97. 
Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewed December 23.) 


My Lord, Paris, December 21, 1840. 

I HAVE received your Lordship’s despatches to the 18th instant. 

I this morning communicated to M. Guizot your Lordship’s letter of the 
15th ultimo to the Commissioners of the Admiralty, signifying to their Lord- 
ships the Queen’s commands as to further instructions to be addressed to 
Admiral Sir Robert Stopford. The refusal of Her Majesty’s Government to 
ratify that part of the Convention concluded between Commodore Napier and 
Boghos Bey, which stipulates for the guarantee by the Allied Powers of the 
hereditary government of Egypt, was expected by the French Minister, and he 
seemed not to apprehend that the want of that guarantee would retard the execu- 
tion of the other arrangements of the Treaty, and expressed his persuasion that 
if the Sultan should be so ill-advised as to refuse to remstate Mehemet Ali in the 
Government of Egypt, the Allied Powers would not aid the Turkish forces in 
expelling the Pasha from that pashalic. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) GRANVILLE. 


Deen Tes S er eT kind) eon Fat) aay) LLG 
, No. 98. 


Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received December 23.) 


My Lord, Vienna, December 15, 1840. 

M. DE PONTOIS is reported to have made in the latter days of November 
an attempt to induce the Porte to leave Candia to Mehemet Ali. This step on 
the part of M. de Pontois appears to have been taken in connection with advices 
received by him from Alexandria, in support of which opinion I inclose copy of 
Mehemet Ali’s letter of the 11th of November to Louis Philippe, drawn up 
by M. Walewski, and evidently destined for communication to the Chambers, 
in order to serve the purposes of M. Thiers. 

I have, &c., 


(Signed) BEAUVALE, 


— ne 


N 2 


92 


Inclosure in No. 98. 


Mehemet Ali to the King of the French. 
Sire, 

JE sens le besoin d’exprimer 4 votre Majesté la reconnaissance dont je suis 
pénétré. Depuis longtemps le Gouvernement du Roi m’a témoigné de lintérét. 
Aujourd’hui votre Majesté met le comble 4 ses bontés pour moi en déclarant aux 
Puissances qu’elle considére mon existence politique comme indispensable a 
Véquilibre Européen. Cette nouvelle marque si signalée de V’intérét que daigne 
me porter votre Majesté, m’impose des devoirs que je saurai remplir; et 
d’abord celui d’exprimer clairement et succinctement au Roi de la France les 
motifs de ma conduite. 

Dans tous les temps, le veeu le plus sincére de mon coeur a été pour la 
prospérité de l’Empire Ottoman. Je désirais le voir heureux, tranquille, et 
puissant ; mon ambition la plus grande a toujours été de lui venir en aide 
contre ses ennemis et de sacrifier pour sa défense tout ce que j’ai acquis 
péniblement par de longs travaux. Lt je le dirai ici avec franchise, ce qui m’a 
toujours porté vers la France, ce qui m’a toujours engagé 4 me conformer a ses 
conseils, c’est que je savais que de tous les Gouvernemens de |’Europe c’était 
celui qui voulait le plus de bien, et de la maniére la plus désintéressée, a 
l’Empire Ottoman. 

Je prie votre Majesté de croire que c’est l’amour de mon pays qui a toujours 
dirigé ma conduite. 

Ainsi apres bien des efforts, bien des contrariétés, j’étais parvenu a faire 
régner l’ordre en Syrie, 2 faire succéder la paix et la tranquillité a Vanarchie et 
au désordre. Et si j’ai insisté si vivement pour que cette province restat sous 
mon gouvernement, c’est parceque j’avais la conviction que si elle m’était 
enlevée, tous les maux que j’en avais extirpés retomberaient de nouveau sur elle. 
Entre mes mains la Syrie était un élément de force qui me mettait 4 méme de 
porter des secours efficaces au Sultan et a la Turquie; entre les mains de la 
Porte, j’ose le dire, la Syrie était vouée a Vanarchie, au désordre, 4 la guerre 
civile. Mais aujourd’hui ce que je craignais s’est en partie réalisé: V’influence 
étrangére est venue en aide aux élémens de discorde et d’insurrection: une 
premiére tentative avait été impuissante pour faire soulever les populations ; 
cette fois-ci les efforts de ceux qui ont cru travailler pour l’intégrité de ’ Empire 
Ottoman, en excitant 4 la révolte une de ses provinces, ont réussi, non a insurger 
tout le pays, mais a armer les unes contre les autres les populations, et a 
amener la guerre civile. Les motifs d’intérét géneral qui me portaient a désirer 
conserver la Syrie sous mon gouvernement, n’existent done plus. Il reste mes 
intéréts personnels et ceux de ma famille ; ceux-la je suis prét a les sacrifier a 
la paix du monde. C’est a la haute sagesse du Roi des Francais que je 
m/’adresse ; je mets mon sort entre ses mains, elle reglera 4 sa volonté les 
arrangemens qui doivent terminer le différend. 

Si votre Majesté le juge convenable, je suis prét 4 me contenter en Syrie 
du Pachalic d’Acre. Ce paysa resisté 4 tous les efforts que l’on a tenté pour 
le soulever contre moi. Votre Majesté trouvera juste peut-¢tre de me faire 
laisser Ile de Candie, qui jouit depuis longtemps sous mon gouvernement 
d’une prospérité inaltérable. 

Mais si au contraire les hautes lumiéres de votre Majesté la portent a 
croire que le moment des concessions est passé, et que celui d’une résistance 
opiniatre est arrivé, je suis prét 4 combattre jusqu’a mon dernier soupir, et mes 
enfans aussi. Mon armée de Syrie est encore considérable; Damas, Alep, 
toutes les principales villes sont en mon pouvoir; mon armée du Hedjas est 
en marche, une partie est déja au Caire, le reste y sera sous peu. Des Chéiks 
influens du Liban partent pour la montagne et me répondent de ramener les 
Druses et les Maronites a la soumission. J’ai quarante batimens préts 4 prendre 
la mer au premier signal de votre Majesté. J’espére donc que personne ne se 
méprendra sur les véritables motifs qui m’inspirent la démarche que je fais 
aujourd’ hui. Personne ne croira que c’est la peur qui me fait agir ; j’ai pour moi 
toute ma vie pour répondre a une pareille accusation. Il y a quinze jours 
encore quand toute mon existence était menacée; on aurait pu voir de la 
faiblesse dans ma conduite si j’avais cédé; mais aujourd’hui que mon existence 
politique est sauvée par la déclaration de la France, je ne risque que peu de 


93 


choses a prolonger la guerre. Non, ce ne sont pas les forces qu’on déploie 
contre moi qui m/’effrayent ; ce qui m/’effraye c’est d’étre cause d’une guerre 
génerale, c’est d’entrainer la France, 4 qui je dois tant, dans une guerre qui 
n’aurait d’autre but que mes intéréts personnels. Dans cette circonstance, je 
viens m’adresser 4 votre Majesté; la reconnaissance m’en faisait un devoir, et 
@ailleurs j’ai pour le Roi des Frangais l’admiration, la confiance que sa sagesse 
et ses lumiéres inspirent au monde. Je viens mettre mon sort entre ses mains. 
Quelle que soit la décision du Roi, je Vaccepterai avec reconnaissance, pourvu 
que votre Majesté veuille bien prendre part au Traité qui interviendra entre les 
Grandes Puissances pour régler ma destinée. 

Enfin, quoi qu’en arrive, je prie le Roi de me permettre de lui dire que ma 
reconnaissance pour lui et la France sera éternelle dans mon cceur, que je la 
leguerai 4 mes enfans et & mes petits enfans comme un devoir sacré. 

Je voulais envoyer un de mes principaux ofliciers porter cette lettre au 
pied du trone de votre Majesté, mais la difficulté et la longueur de la quaran- 
taine m’ont déterminé a la remettre au Comte Walewski, qui la fera parvenir a 
votre Majesté. 


(Translation.) 
Sire, 

I FEEL the necessity of expressing to your Majesty the sentiments of 
gratitude by which Iam animated. Fora long time past the Government of 
the King has shown an interest in me. Now Your Majesty completes your 
kindness to me by declaring to the Powers, that you consider my political 
existence as indispensable to the balance of Europe. This fresh and signal 
mark of the interest which Your Majesty deigns to bear towards me, imposes 
upon me duties which I shall know how to discharge; and first that of repre- 
senting clearly and succinctly to the King of Trance the motives of my 
conduct. 

At all times, the most sincere desire of my heart has been for the 
prosperity of the Ottoman Empire. I wished to see it happy, tranquil, and 
powerful; my greatest ambition has always been to come to its aid against. 
its enemies, and to sacrifice in its defence all that I have painfully acquired 
by great labour. And I will here say frankly, that 1 have always been 
inclined towards France, and have always been induced to act in accordance 
with its advice, because I knew that of all the Governments of Europe it was. 
that which desired the greatest good, and in the most disinterested manner, 


for the Ottoman Empire. 
I request Your Majesty to believe that the love of my country has 


always guided my conduct. ; 
Thus, after many efforts and many difficulties, I succeeded in establish- 
ing order in Syria, in substituting peace and tranquillity for anarchy and 
disorder. And if I have insisted so strongly upon that province remaining 
under my government, it is because I was convinced that if it was taken 
away from me, all the evils which I had rooted out of it would again 
befall it. In my hands Syria was an element of power which enabled. 
me to give effectual assistance to the Sultan and to Turkey; in the hands 
of the Porte, I venture to say, Syria was given over to anarchy, to 
disorder, and to civil war. But now that which I feared has been partly 
realised: foreign influence has come to the aid of the elements of discord and 
insurrection; a first attempt was unable to raise the population; this time 
the efforts of those who have considered themselves as labouring for the 
integrity of the Ottoman Empire, by exciting one of its provinces to revolt, 
have succeeded, not in raising the whole country, but in arming the people 
against each other, and in bringing on a civil war. ‘Therefore, the motives of 
general interest which induced me to wish to keep Syria under my govern- 
ment no longer exist. My personal interest and that of my family remain; 
I am ready to sacrifice these for the peace of the world. J appeal to the 
exalted wisdom of the King of the French; I leave my fate in his hands; he 
will regulate, according to his will, the arrangements which are to settle the 
dispute. sen 
If Your Majesty thinks proper, I am ready to be satisfied in Syria with 
the Pashalic of Acre. That country has resisted all the efforts which have 


94 


been made to raise it against me. Your Majesty will perhaps find it right to 
leave me the Island of Candia, which has for a long time enjoyed unalterable 
prosperity under my Government. é 

But if, on the contrary, Your Majesty’s great experience leads you think 
that the time for concessions is past, and that the moment for an obstinate 
resistance is arrived, I am ready to resist to my last breath, and my children 
also. My army in Syria is still very great; Damascus, Aleppo, all the 
principal towns are in my power; my army in the Hedjaz is on its march; a 
part of it is already at Cairo, the rest will be there in a short time. Influen- 
tial Sheiks of Lebanon are setting out for the mountain and answer to me 
for bringing back the Druses and Maronites to submission. I have forty 
vessels ready for sea on the first signal given by Your Majesty. I hope then 
that nobody will mistake the real motives which have suggested to me the 
step which I am now taking. Nobody will think that it is fear which induces 
me to act thus; I have all my life to adduce in my favour in answer to such 
an accusation. It was but a fortnight ago that my whole existence was 
threatened; it might have been thought that there was weakness in my 
conduct if I had yielded; but now that my political existence is saved by the 
declaration of France, I risk but little by prolonging the war. No, I am not 
alarmed by the forces which are employed against me; but I am fearful of 
being the cause of a general war, and of hurrying France, to whom I owe so 
much, into a war which could have no other object than my personal 
interest. Under these circumstances, I have addressed myself to Your 
Majesty; gratitude made it my duty to do so; and, moreover, I entertain 
for the King of the French the admiration and the confidence with which his 
wisdom and his experience inspire the world. I have left my fate in his 
hands. Whatever the decision of the King may be, I shall receive it with 
gratitude, provided that Your Majesty will deign to join in the Treaty which 
will be concluded between the Great Powers for the purpose of deciding my 
fate. 

In short, whatever may happen, I request the King to permit me to 
assure him that my gratitude to him and to France will never be effaced from 
my mind, that I shall leave it as an inheritance to my children and my grand- 
children as a sacred duty. 

I wished to send one of my principal officers to convey this letter to the 


‘foot of Your Majesty’s throne, but the difficulties and the lengthened period 


of the quarantine have determined me to deliver it to Count Walewski, who 
will convey it to your Majesty. 


No. 99. 


Rechid Pasha to Chekib Effendt.—(Communicated by Chekib Effendi at Paris 
through Lord Granville, and received in London, December 24.) 


Monsieur |’ Ambassadeur, Le | Chewal, 1256. (November 26, 1840.) 


PAR votre dépéche du ler Ramazan, vous m’informez que dans un entretien 
que vous avez eu avec son Excellence M. le Vicomte Palmerston, ce 
Ministre vous a dit que, d’aprés les nouvelles qu’il avait recues de Constan- 
tinople, le Gouvernement Ottoman semblerait disposé, pour ménager la France, 
et empécher une guerre en Europe, 4 demander la médiation de cette Puissance 
pour faire évacuer la Syrie aux troupes Egyptiennes, en réhabilitant Méhémet 
Ali dans la qualité de Pacha avec l’héréedité de Egypte. ‘Le principal Secré- 
taire d’Etat des Affaires Etrangéres a ajouté, que pour ce qui regarde la réhabi- 
litation de Méhémet Ali, son Gouvernement ‘y était également disposé, et que 
des instructions avaient été transmises 4 ce sujet 4 M. l’Ambassadeur de 
Sa Majesté Britannique a Constantinople ; mais qu’il différait d’opinion en ce 
qui avait trait 8 la demande de la médiation de la France, qu’il considérait comme 
inadmissible par les Cours Alliées. Vous m’avez informé, en méme temps, que 
sa Seigneurie ‘vous avait conseillé d’écrire 4 votre Ambassadeur 4 Paris, Nouri 
Effendi, pour l’engager 4 suspendre toute démarche de ce genre qui pourrait lui 
avoir été préscrite auprés du Gouvernement Francais. 

Cette communication, M. !’Ambassadeur, m’a vivement peiné, car je dois 


95 


en inférer que le Gouvernement de Sa Majesté Britannique suppose la possi- 
bilité, de la part du nétre, de faire, dans la Question Egyptienne, des démarches 
qu'il lui laisse ignorer, et d’avoir des vues opposées aux siennes. Non seule- 
ment la Sublime Porte n’a jamais demandé la médiation de la France, non 
seulement elle n’a jamais autorisé Nouri Effendi a faire au Cabinet Francais la 
moindre ouverture ni la moindre insinuation de ce genre, mais elle n’en a méme 
jamais eu Vintention, et jamais je n’en ai rien dit ni officiellement ni confiden- 
tiellement a qui que ce fut, qui put faire soupconner une pareille intention. C’est 
pourquoi je ne comprends pas comment son Excellence le principal Secrétaire 
d’Etat des Affaires Etrangéres a pu recevoir l’information dont vous me parlez. 

Si je dois me livrer aux conjectures pour mel’expliquer, voici ce quej’en 
pense. 

Il vy a un mois et demi environ, j’ai cru convenable, pour me conformer a 
Yexemple des autres Cours Alliées, d’inviter Nouri Effendi & exprimer au 
Cabinet Frangais nos regrets sur son isolement. Ce fut la la seule démarche 
faite par la Sublime Porte auprés de ce Cabinet relativement aux affaires 
d’Egypte ; je ne dirai pas aprés, mais méme avant la Convention de Londres, 
depuis que je suis de retour 4 Constantinople; et je n’ai pas manqué d’en 
informer immédiatement les quatre Représentans ici, qui l’ont tous approuvé. 
Le Cabinet Francais aurait-il interprété cette démarche dans un sens & faire. 
croire que nous avons voulu demander sa médiation? C’est ce que j’ignore ; 
mais en tout cas ce que je viens d’exposer plus haut est la vérité toute 
pure. | 

Quant a la réhabilitation de Méhémet Ali en Egypte, je n’ai non plus. 
jamais laissé entrevoir, soit 4 ce Cabinet, soit 4 son Ambassadeur ici, aucune 
opinion, aucune intention a ce sujet, et je dirai méme que je n’ai jamais été 
sondé la-dessus. C’est seulement dans mes communications confidentielles 
avec les quatre Représentans Alliés que j’ai parlé, et par maniére de conversation, 
de la possibilité d’obtenir de Sa Majesté le Sultan la réhabilitation de Méhémet 
Ali en Egypte, si leurs Cours la désiraient comme un moyen d’empécher la. 
guerre en Kurope. 

Remarquez au surplus, M. |’Ambassadeur, que méme avec les Représen- 
tans sus-mentionnés je n’ai pu moccuper de cette réhabilitation que comme 
d’une simple possibilite, puisque, n’ayant jamais été dans le cas de prendre les 
ordres de Sa Majesté sur ce point, il ne m’était pas donné, comme il ne m’est. 
pas donné méme a l’heure qu’il est, d’énoncer 4 ce sujet une opinion formelle. 
Mais je dirai de plus, qu’en me permettant d’énoncer cette possibilite méme, je 
n’ai eu en vue que de donner une nouvelle preuve du désir de la Sublime 
Porte de déférer au voeu de ses Alliés, dont la destitution de Méhemet Ali 
paraissait avoir encouru la désapprobation. 

Ces expositions que je vous autorise, M. l’Ambassadeur, a porter 4 la con- 
naissance de M. le Vicomte Palmerston, suffiront, je l’espére, pour fixer son 
jugement au sujet de l'information dont il vous a entretenu. 

J’y ajouterai une derniére considération. 

Nul mignore toutes les tentations, les séductions, les menaces méme 
dirigées contre moi avant la Convention du Juillet, et lorsque nous n’étions liés 
par aucun engagement positif, pour me faire dévier de la ligne politique que 
m’était préscrite par les intéréts de mon pays. Les faits ont prouvé que j’ai su 
résister 4 tout, et justifier la confiance des Cabinets dont les vues concordaient 
avec les notres. Et maintenant que le succés est venu couronner nos communs 
efforts; maintenant que mon pays a pu recueillir, par la Convention du Juillet, 
la fruit de la persévérance de son Gouvernement dans la vole si parsemée @écueils 
qu'il avait adoptée ; lorsqu’enfin des obligations sacrées nous sont imposées 
par le parti solennel qui nous unit aujourd’hui aux Quatre Puissances, l’on me 
croirait assez mal avisé pour changer de direction, et assez peu jaloux de la 
confiance de mon Souverain et de l’estime publique pour agir en sens contraire a 
ces obligations. Je me réputerais malheureux, M. l’Ambassadeur, si je pouvais 


étre un seul instant objet d’un pareil soup¢on. 


(Signé) RECHID PACHA. 
(Translation.) 
Monsieur |’ Ambassadeur, Ea 


IN your despatch of the Ist Ramazan, you inform me that, at an inter- 
view which you had had with his Excellency Viscount Palmerston, that 


a“ = = 


96 

Minister told you that, according to the intelligence which he had received 
from Constantinople, the Ottoman Government would seem disposed, in 
order to keep well with France, and to prevent a war in Europe, to request 
the mediation of that Power for the purpose of procuring the evacuation of 
Syria by the Egyptian troops, by restoring to Mehemet Ali the title of Pasha 
with the hereditary succession in Egypt. The Principal Secretary of State 
for Foreign Affairs added, that with regard to the reinstatement of Mehemet 
Ali, his Government was equally favourable to it, and that instructions had 
been sent to Her Britannic Majesty's Ambassador at Constantinople upon 
that subject; but that he differed in opinion with respect to the request for 
the mediation of France, which he considered as inadmissible by the Allied 
Courts. You informed me, at the same time, that his Lordship had advised 
you to write to our Ambassador at Paris, Nouri Effendi, to invite him to 
suspend any overture of this sort which he might have been instructed to 
make to the French Government. 

This communication has pained me acutely, M. l’Ambassadeur, for I must 
infer from it that Her Britannic Majesty’s Government supposes the possibi- 
lity of our Government taking, uponthe Egyptian Question, steps of which we 
leave them in ignorance, and of our entertaining views opposed to theirs. 
Not only has the Sublime Porte never requested the mediation of France, 
not only has it never authorized Nouri Effendi to make the slightest over- 
ture or the slightest hint of this sort to the I’rench Cabinet, but it has never 
even had an intention of doing so, and I have never said anything either 
officially or confidentially to any person, which could cause any suspicion of 
such an intention. Therefore I do not understand how his Excellency the 
Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, can have received the infor- 
mation of which you speak to me. 

If I must trust to conjecture to explain it, this is what I think with 
respect to it. , 

About a month and a half since, I thought proper, in order to follow 
the example of the other Allied Courts, to request Nouri Effendi to express to 
the French Cabinet our regret at its isolated position. That was the only 
step taken by the Sublime Porte with regard to that Cabinet relative to the 
affairs of Egypt; I will not say after, but even before the Convention of 
London, since I have returned to Constantinople; and I did not fail imme- 
diately to inform the Four Representatives here thereof, who all approved of 
it. Could the French Cabinet have interpreted that step in such a sense as 
to cause a belief that we had desired to request its mediation? That I do 
not ie but in any case what I have above stated is only the simple 
truth. 

As to the reinstatement of Mehemet Ali in Egypt, I have also never 
allowed any opinion or intention on this subject to be apparent, either to that 
Cabinet or to its Ambassador here, and I will even say that I have never 
been sounded thereupon. It was only in my confidential communications 
with the Four Allied Representatives, and in the way of conversation, that I 
have spoken of the possibility of obtaining from His Majesty the Sultan the 
reinstatement of Mehemet Ali in Egypt, if their Courts desired it as a 
means of preventing war in Hurope. 

Observe, moreover, M. Ambassadeur, that even with the above- 
mentioned Representatives I have only been able to treat that reinstatement 
as an event of bare possibility, because, never having been in a situation to 
take the orders of His Majesty upon that point, it was not in my power, as 
it 1s not even now, to give a formal opinion upon the subject. But I will say 
further, that in allowing myself to speak of even that possibility, my only 
object was to give a fresh proof of the desire of the Sublime Porte to yield 
to the wishes of its Allies, whose disapprobation appeared to have been 
incurred by the deposition of Mehemet Ali. 

These statements, which I authorize you, M. l’Ambassadeur; to commu- 
nicate to Viscount Palmerston, will, I hope, be sufficient to settle his opinion 
upon the subject of the information about which he spoke to you. 

I will add thereto one further consideration. 

Nobody is ignorant of all the temptations, allurements, and even threats 
directed against me before the Convention of July, and when we were not 
bound by any positive engagements, in order to make me deviate from the 


line of policy which the interests of my country prescribed to me. Facts 
have proved that I have known how to resist everything, and to justify the 
confidence of the Cabinets whose views agree with ours.. And now that 
success has crowned our joint efforts; now that my country has gathered, 
by the Convention of July, the fruit of the perseverance of its Government in 
the course, so full of difficulties, which it had adopted ; when, in short, sacred 
obligations are imposed upon us by the solemn engagement which now unites 
us to the Four Powers, I should be thought sufficiently ill-advised were I to 
change my course, and scarcely sensible enough of the confidence of my 
Sovereign and of public estimation were I to act in a sense contrary to those 
obligations. I should consider myself unfortunate, M: Ambassadeur, if I 
could, for a single instant, be liable to such a suspicion. 

(Signed) RECHID PASHA. 


No. 100. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received December 22.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, November 25, 1840. 


HIS Excellency the Internuncio has been so good as to allow me to take 
copies, which I inclose, of three documents relating to Syria and Egypt, 
which I think are well worthy of your Lordship’s perusal. ‘They corroborate, 
to a certain degree, the letter from Mr. Larking of the 16th instant, but they 
give a clearer view of the state of affairs, and of the designs of Mehemet Ali. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 100. 
Ibrahim Pasha to Mehemet Ali, (without date.) 


EYUB AGA m’a apporté hier la lettre de votre Altesse. Je l’ai lue et 
bien comprise. Le méme jour, le 3 Ramazan, sont venus ici Sélim et Ismael 
Pacha avec Goubran Effendi. Le Hasné n’étant pas bien pourvu, le paiement 
n’a pas pu se faire. II est indispensable de m’envoyer 47,000 bourses. Voici 
ce que disent Sélim et Ismael. Les équipages des régimens d’Artillerie n’ont 
plus d’orge. La Cavalerie en manque aussi, et il est impossible de s’en pro- 
curer. Les paysans cachent tout. Ils ne veuillent ni payer, ni donner rien. 
Les infidéles de Saida les ont rendus audacieux. 

Cependant nous manquons de beaucoup de choses. Si lamer ne sera pas 
bientot libre, la Syrie ne sera pas tenable; voici comme vont les choses. Si, il 
y a onze jours, votre Altesse m’avait ordonné de me retirer d’ici, je ne l’aurais 
pas fait: mais aujourd’hui tout a changé. Notre Infanterie serait bonne, mais 
les Syriens ne valent rien. Je les ai laissé partir en leur faisant laisser les 
armes. Les Arnauts, ayant parlé 4 quelque séducteur, demandent leur solde ou 
leur congé: je les ai laiss¢ partir. Une portion de Hanadi a eu le méme sort. 
Nous sommes donc seuls. Les pluies et les froids deviennent incommodes. 
Les bivouacs ne valent rien. Je puis tenir ot je suis jusqu’a la findu Ramazan; 
mais je ne saurais amener les piéces dans le cas que votre Altesse voulut pour le 
moment abandonner Ber-es-Sham (la Syrie). Nos adversaires recoivent des 
secours de Constantinople et de Malte. Les batimens, les soldats, les munitions 
leur arrivent journellement, et ils parcourent les cétes de la Syrie en autant 
@heures que moi j’aurais pu |’effectuer en jours. II est par conséquent prudent 
de ne pas venir ici avec la flotte, car les Anglais pourraient la prendre sous 
nos yeux. Les Consuls m/’ont fait savoir que l’on veut bombarder Akka. 
Bombarder peut-étre, mais prendre, pour le moment, non. Tout y est en 
bon état. Mahmoud a demandé des Artilleurs; je lui en envoie 340, car ils me 
sont inutiles dans ma position ici. Rien de nouveau de la frontiére. Maggiun 
Beg est 8 Alep. Ahmed Begse retirera si la troupe Ottomane voudra avancer. 
La saison cependant n’est pas bien favorable pour nos adversaires, et ils ne sont 
pas en nombre. Mageiun suppose qu’il y a des espions et des séducteurs a 


O 


Alep, et que le bas peuple est aveugle: la méme chose arrive 4 Damas; les 
pieces le confirment. 


N.B.—Ladate présumée de cette lettre est le 4 Ramazan (le 30 Octobre). 
Elle a été traduite par le Consul de France, mais ne luia pas été remise. 


(Translation.) 


EYUB AGA brought me your Highness’s letter yesterday. I have 
read it and thoroughly understood it. The same day, the 3rd Ramazan, 
Selim and Ismael Pasha came here with Goubran Effendi. The Hasne 
(Treasury) not being well provided, the payment could not be made. It is 
indispensable that 47,000 purses should be sent to me. This is what Selim 
and Ismael say. The trains of the regiments of artillery have no more 
barley. The cavalry is also in want of it, and it is impossible to procure it. 
The peasants conceal every thing. They will neither pay nor give any 
thing. The infidels of Sidon have made them audacious. 

Meanwhile we are in want of many things. If the sea is not soon open, 
Syria will not be tenable; this is the way in which things are going on. If, 
eleven days since, your Highness had ordered me te retire from hence, I 
would not have done it: but now all is changed. Our infantry would be 
good, but the Syrians are not worth any thing. I have allowed them to go 
away, making: them leave their arms. The Arnaouts, having spoken to some 
seducer, demand their pay or their discharge. I have allowed them to go 
away. A portion of Hanadi has been similarly treated. We are, therefore, 
alone. The rains and the cold become troublesome. The bivouacs are of 
no use. I can remain where I am till the end of the Ramazan; but I could 
not bring away the artillery in case your Highness should wish for the 
moment to abandon Ber-es-Sham (Syria). Our adversaries receive succours 
from Constantinople and from Malta. Vessels, soldiers, and ammunition 
reach them daily, and they run over the coast of Syria in as many hours as 
I should take days to do so. It is consequently prudent not to come here 
with the fleet, for the English could capture it before our eyes. The Consuls 
have let me know that it is intended to bombard Acre. To bombard it 
perhaps, but to capture it, at present, no. Every thing there is in a 
good state. Mahmoud has applied for artillerymen; I send him 340, for 
thay are useless to me in my position here. Nothing new from the frontier. 
Maggiun Beg is at Aleppo. Ahmed Beg will retire if the Ottoman troops 
should advance. However, the season is not very favourable for our adver- 
saries, and they are not numerous. Maggiun presumes that there are spies 
and seducers at Aleppo, and that the common people are blind: the same 
thing has happened at Damascus; the despatches confirm this. 


N.B.—The supposed date of this letter is the 4th Ramazan (30th 
of October). It was translated by the French Consul, but was not deli- 
vered to him. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 100. 
Translation of a Report from Alexandria. 


Le 15 Novembre, 1840. 


LA nouvelle de la prise de St. Jean d’Acre par les Alliés est parvenue ici 
Je 9 du courant par le bateau 4 vapeur Francais “1’Euphrate.”” Peu avant 
arriverent des Tatars par terre, annoncant l’apparition des escadres combinées 
par devant la dite ville avec l’intention de l’attaquer. 

Méhémet Ali, qui a Varrivée de ces nouvelles n’avait pas désespéré encore 
que ses affaires en Syrie pourraient prendre une tournure favorable, mit tout en 
ceuvre pour y parvenir. On é€crivit au Caire pour y parvenir sur-le-champ un 
corps d’armée dont l’armement avait été préparé depuis quelque temps. Simul- 
tanément les ordres tenus en réserve furent expédiés pour la sortie des escadres, 
lui devaient se diriger sur les cétes de Syrie avec des instructions cachetées, 


On comptait sur St. Jean d’Acre comme sur un point, sinon imprenable pour 
les forces actuelles des Alliés, du moins tel A pouvoir leur résister assez long- 
temps pour qu’elles se trouvassent enti¢rement épuisées avant sa reddition. 

Pendant qu’on s’occupait de ces mesures arriva au palais le Consul-Général 
de France pour présenter 4 Méhémet Ali en audience publique les officiers du 
Pape venus pour recevoir quelques colonnes d’albatre. Ce Consul fit tomber 
de suite la conversation sur la sortie de l’escadre, et conseilla trés-énergique- 
ment l’abandon de cette idée. Ceci se passait dans la Grande Salle d’Audience 
en présence de plusieurs dignitaires et d’un public trés-nombreux, lorsque 
Méhémet Ali éclata, et en élevant la voix, s’exprima en ces termes:—‘ C’est 
vous et votre France qui m’avez mis dans cette position; je suis las des conseils 
vains et inutiles; désormais je n’écouterai plus personne et ne suivrai que mes 
propres inspirations.” 

M. Cochelet repliqua en priant le Pacha d’attendre encore, et en ajoutant 
que les affaires n’étaient pas terminées ; qu’il espérait recevoir par le prochain 
bateau a vapeur la nouvelle que la médiation de la France a été acceptée, ou 
qu’elle a recours aux armes. Toutefois Méhémet Aline se laissa pas calmer; il 
déclara de nouveau a haute voix, qu'il n’attendra plus de secours d’aucune 
Puissance étrangére, et qu’a l’avenir il ne se laisserait guider que par sa propre 
volonté. 

J’ai taché de rendre compte de cette conversation aussi distinctement que 
possible, pour faire comprendre que Méhémet Ali avait Vintention de faire con- 
naitre publiquement quel peu de cas il faisait des promesses Francaises, quoique 
d’autres circonstances semblent autoriser une opinion contraire. 

Quant a la prise de St. Jean d’Acre, elle a produit ici une sensation pro- 
fonde, qui a tout a fait ébranlé le parti Egyptien. La derniére étincelle d’espé- 
rance en faveur de la Syrie a disparu tout 4 coup. Les amis de Méhémet Ali, 
tant Européens que Musulmans, ainsi que les Primats les plus influens du pays, 
se réunissent pour le déterminer a la condescendance. Méhémet Ali se montrait 
au commencement taciturne et refléchissant. Il ne trouva pas ces insinuations 
dignes d’aucune réponse. Peu aprés cependant il changeait de contenance, et il 
commencait par écouter les conseils de ces amis. Le soir du 10 il fit connaitre 
4 ceux-ci d’avoir pris la résolution de finir tout a l’amiable, car Vhomme, disait- 
il, n’emporte rien de tout cela de ce monde-ci; il parlait de l’envoi d’un parle- 
mentaire avec des propositions d’arrangement aux deux Amiraux, de la restitution 
de la flotte Turque, du rappel d’Ibrahim Pacha de Syrie; et le public put, durant 
une journée, se bercer de l’espoir d’une paix prochaine. 

Le 11, M. Cochelet et le Comte Walewski se rendaient de nouveau chez 
Méhémet Ali pour le détourner de son projet. Ils lui représentérent les suites 
facheuses que les mesures susdites pourraient entrainer, et sépuisérent en 
assurances de l’appui de la France dans le cas ou on en viendrait aux extrémités. 
En méme temps ils demandérent de lui une déclaration définitive sur le systéme 
qu’il comptait suivre 4 l’avenir, demande a laquelle toutefois 1 ne répondit que 
d’une maniére evasive. Ce concert, quelque passif que fit le rdle qu’y joua 
Méhémet Ali, amena cependant, sous certains rapports, un changement dans 
Vétat des choses. L’envoi d’un parlementaire fut rejeté comme contraire a la 
dignité de Méhémet Ali, et les préparatifs de guerre furent repris avec une 
nouvelle vigueur. On travaille depuis avec la plus grande activité a toutes les 
fortifications non encore achevées. Celles qui l’étaient déja furent montées au 
complet et munies du matériel nécessaire. Comme on manquait d’Artillerie de 
terre, on débarqua des flottes 8000 Artilleurs et Matelots, dont quelques détache- 
mens doivent étre employés aussi sur d’autres points de la cote. Au débarque- 
ment de ces troupes se rattacha le désarmement de tous les batimens de guerre 
de notre part. Trois régimens de Cavalerie stationnés ici regurent l’ordre de 
partir pour El-Ariche, vers ot se dirigera aussi |’expédition préparée au Caire 
et destinée pour la Syrie. Enfin on annonca 4 la Garde Nationale que dore- 
navant on lui donnerait,, comme aux troupes de ligne, une paye formelle et des 
rations,—mesure qui produisit la plus facheuse impression sur ce corps mécontent, 
qui se croit 4 présent enti¢rement incorporé au militaire, 

En attendant, cependant, Ibrahim Pacha a été rappelé de Syrie, et I ordre 
lui en a été transmis par quatre courriers expédiés par des routes différentes. 
Pour ce qui regarde d’ailleurs les préparatifs de guerre, il s’y rattache tant 
d’affectation et un désir si patent de produire de V’effet, que, quelque s¢rieux 
qu ils puissent étre, cette vue mh = saurait étre méconnue. 


ag. Se ae 


Leas tr ree 


100 


Voici le tableau qu’offre aujourd’hui la vie publique d’Alexandrie. D’aprés 
ce qui précéde, il est difficile de voir au fond des choses. Mais je puis avancer 
ici, comme étant la conviction de plusieurs personnes admises dans la confiance 
de Méhémet Ali, que sa flexibilité continue, qu’il devient tous les jours plus 
étranger aux espérances qu’il avait placées dans le Gouvernement Frangais, et 
que tout le reste ne se fait que pour donner la meilleure couleur possible aux 
chances qu'il aurait dans le cas ob il ne serait pas réduit a se battre pour la 
derniére pouce de terrain. 


Le 16 Novembre, au soir. 
P.S.—La nouvelle de la dissolution du Ministére Thiers a été apporté ici 


\ 


par le bateau & vapeur arrivé hier. En la recevant Méhémet Ali a observé, 
dit-on, une attitude entiérement passive. 


(Translation.) 


November 15, 1840. 


THE intelligence of the capture of St. Jean d’Acre by the Allies arrived 
here on the 9th instant by the French steam-boat, ‘‘l’Euphrate.” <A short 
time before some Tatars arrived by land, announcing the appearance of the 
combined squadrons before that town with the intention of attacking it. 

Mehemet Ali, who, on the arrival of this intelligence, did not despair of 
his affairs in Syria still taking a favourable turn, used every means to bring 
that about. Orders were sent to Cairo for the immediate arrival there of 
a military force, the equipment of which had been prepared some time since. 
At the same time, the orders which had been held in reserve, were despatched 
for the departure of the squadrons which were to proceed to the coast of 
Syria with sealed instructions. St. Jean d’Acre was looked upon as a posi- 
tion, if not impregnable to the present forces of the Allies, at least such an 
one as would be able to resist them for so long a time that they would be 
entirely exhausted before its surrender. 

While these measures were being taken, the Consul-General of France 
arrived at the palace, for the purpose of presenting to Mehemet Ali at a public 
audience the Papal officers who had come to receive some columns of alabas- 
ter. The Consul immediately turned the conversation to the departure of 
the squadron, and very earnestly advised the abandonment of that idea. 
This was taking place in the great hall of audience, in the presence of several 
dignitaries and of a considerable number of people, when Mehemet Ali broke 
out, and raising his voice expressed himself in these terms :—‘‘ It is you and 
your France who have placed me in this position; I am tired of vain and 
useless counsels ; henceforward I shall no longer listen to anybody, and shall 
only follow my own ideas.” 

M. Cochelet replied by requesting the Pasha to wait a little, and 
adding that matters were not settled; that he hoped to receive by the next 
steam-boat intelligence that the mediation of France has been accepted, or 
that she has recourse to arms. However, Mehemet Ali would not allow 
himself to be quieted; he again loudly declared, that he would no longer 
wait for succour from any Foreign Power, and that for the future he would 
only allow himself to be guided by his own will. 

I have endeavoured to report this conversation as clearly as possible, 
in order to make it understood that Mehemet Ali intended to make it publicly 
known how little value he attached to the promises of the French, although 
other circumstances appear to justify a contrary opinion. 

As to the capture of St. Jean d’Acre, it has produced a deep sensation 
here, which has entirely shaken the Egyptian party. The last spark of hope 
in favour of Syria has all at once disappeared. The friends of Mehemet Ali, 
both Europeans and Mussulmans, as well as the most influential Chiefs of the 
country, unite for the purpose of inducing him to yield. Mehemet Ali at 
first appeared silent and thoughtful. He did not consider these suggestions 
worthy of any answer. Shortly afterwards, however, he changed his 
manner, and he began to listen to the advice of these friends. On the 
evening of the 10th he acquainted them that he had come to the resolution to 


101 


settle everything in a friendly manner; for man, he said, takes nothing of all 
this out of this world. He spoke of sending a Commissioner, with proposals 
for an arrangement, to the two Admirals, of restoring the Turkish fleet, of re- 
calling Ibrahim Pasha from Syria; and the public could for one day cherish 
the hope of an approaching peace. 

On the 11th, M. Cochelet and Count Walewski called again upon 
Mehemet Ali for the purpose of diverting him from his plan. They repre- 
sented to him the evil consequences to which the above-mentioned measures 
might lead, and they exhausted their assurances of the support of France in 
case things should come to extremities. At the same time they required 
from him a definitive declaration as to the system which he intended to follow 
for the future, a demand to which, however, he replied in but an evasive 
manner. This conference, however passive may have been the part which 
Mehemet Ali played therein, brought about, nevertheless, in some respects a 
change in the state of things. The sending of a Commissioner was rejected 
as contrary to the dignity of Mehemet Ali, and the preparations for war were 
resumed with fresh vigour. The works of all the fortifications not yet finished 
have since been carried on with the greatest activity. Those which were 
already finished were completely armed and were provided with the 
necessary stores. As there was a deficiency in land artillery, 8,000 
artillerymen and seamen were landed from the fleet, some detachments of 
whom are to be employed also upon other points of the coast. The disem- 
barkation of these troops occasioned the disarming of all the ships of war on 
our part. Three regiments of cavalry stationed here received orders to go to 
El-Arish, in which direction also the expedition prepared at Cairo and, 
destined for Syria is to proceed. Finally, the National Guard was informed 
that henceforth it would receive, like the troops of the line, regular pay and 
rations,—a measure which produced the most unfavourable impression upon 
that discontented body, which now considers itself entirely embodied with 
the military. 

In the meanwhile, however, Ibrahim Pasha has been recalled from 
Syria, and the order to this effect has been sent to him by four couriers 
despatched by different routes. Moreover, with regard to the preparations for 
war, there is so much affectation, and so evident a desire to produce effect 
mixed up with them, that, however serious they may be, this secondary con- 
sideration should not be lost sight of. 

Such is the picture which public life in Alexandria now presents. From 
the foregoing it is difficult to see to the bottom of things. But I can here 
assert, as the conviction of several persons admitted into the confidence of 
Mehemet Ali, that his pliableness continues; that he becomes every day 
more weaned from the hopes which he had reposed in the French Govern- 
ment; and that everything else is merely done for the purpose of giving 
the best possible colour to the chances which he would have, in case he 
should not be reduced to fight for the last inch of ground. 


November 16, at night. 

P.S.—The intelligence of the dissolution of the Thiers Ministry was 

brought here by the steam-boat which arrived yesterday. On receiving it 
Mehemet Ali preserved, it is said, an entirely passive attitude. 


Inclosure 3 in No. 100. 


Report from M. Laurin to the Internuncio. 


Péra, le 24 Novembre, 1840. 


D’APRES les nouvelles du Caire du 14 du courant la nouvelle de la prise 
d’Acre y avait produit une sensation difficile a decrire. L’Armée d’ Ibrahim 
Pacha a recu l’ordre de rentrer sans délai en Egypte; Vexpédition de 6,000 
hommes destinés pour la Syrie a fait halte, et 1,800 hommes seulement en 
seront détachés pour El-Arishe. Méhémet Ali fait tous les efforts pour se 
fortifier 4 Alexandrie, et prétend vouloir résister aux attaques des Alliés. 


4 ie 


Les ouvriers des fabriques ainsi que les soldats pris du Rédif ont été con- 
gédiés, parceque le Gouvernement n’a pas pu les payer. Bay 

Les nouvelles d’Alexandrie du 16 du courant portent que Méhemet Ali a 
fait des reproches assez vifs, tant au Consul-Général de France qu’a M. de 
Walewski, sur la conduite de la France & son égard, et qwil n’écouterait plus 
les conseils de cette nation, mais qu'il suivrait ses propres volontés ; qu il est 
prét a s’entendre d l’amiable avec la Porte et ses Alliés; quwil se contenterait de 
Vhérédité de Egypte, et qu’il aviserait incessamment sur ce que sera plus con- 
venable, ou d’attendre une ouverture de la Porte, ou bien d’envoyer a Constan- 
tinople quelqu’un avec ses propositions de soumission. 

Les Francais lui suggéraient de faire ces ouvertures par l’entremise de la 
France: le Pacha penchait pour une entente avec l’Amiral Stopford. On 
suppose cependant que Méhémet Ali ne veut que gagner du temps pour faire 
sortir Ibrahim Pacha, qui se trouve dans une trés-mauvaise position, de la Syrie, 
et pour. se fortifier en Egypte. Les Egyptiens sont las des exigences du 
Pacha et préts a se livrer aux Ottomans a discretion. Un esprit mutin a envahi 
Vescadre Egyptienne, et le Pacha en craint les conséquences. La nouvelle de 
Vinsurrection des Naplousiens, qui doivent avoir massacré la garnison de Jéru- 
salem et s’étre emparés de la Sainte Ville, a complétement confondu le Vice-Roi 
et. ses amis. 

Agréez, &c., 
(Signé) M. LAURIN. 


(Translation.) 


Pera, November 24, 1840, 


ACCORDING to the news from Cairo, of the 14th instant, the intelligence 
of the capture of Acre had produced a sensation there difficult to be described. 
The army of Ibrahim Pasha has received orders to return without delay to 
Egypt; the expedition of 6,000 men, destined for Syria, has halted, and only 
1,800 men thereof will be detached to El-Arish. Mehemet Ali exerts himself 
to the utmost to strengthen himself at Alexandria, and pretends that he is ready 
to resist the attacks of the Allies. 

The workmen of the manufactories, as well as the soldiers belonging to the 
militia, have been discharged, because the Government was unable to pay 
them. 

The intelligence from Alexandria, of the 16th instant, states that Mehemet 
Ali has vehemently reproached both the Consul-General of France and M. de 
Walewski, for the conduct of France towards him, and that he would no longer 
listen to the advice of that nation, but that he would follow his own will; that 
he is ready to come to an amicable understanding with the Porte and its Allies ; 
that he would content himself with the hereditary succession in Egypt, and that 
he would instantly consider which would be the most proper,—to wait for an over- 
ture from the Porte, or to send somebody to Constantinople with proposals of 
submission. 

The French suggested to him that he should make these overtures through 
the medium of France: the Pasha inclined. towards an understanding with 
Admiral Stopford. It is, however, supposed that Mehemet Ali only wishes to 
gain time to get Ibrahim Pasha, who is in a very bad position, out of Syria, and 
to strengthen himself in Egypt. The Egyptians are weary of the exactions of 
the Pasha, and ready to surrender at discretion to the Turks. A mutinous 
spirit pervades the Egyptian squadron, and the Pasha fears the consequences 
thereof. The news of the insurrection of the inhabitants of Naplouse, who 
appear to have massacred the garrison of Jerusalem, and to have taken possession 
of the Holy City, has completely confounded the Viceroy and his friends. 

Accept, &c., 
(Signed) M. LAURIN. 


103 


No. 101. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received December 23.) 
* 
My Lord, Therapia, November 30, 1840. 


I INCLOSE reports received yesterday evening from Mr. Wood, and I 
hope your Lordship will approve of the prudence and activity of that Gentle- 
man, who has contributed more to the success obtained in Syria than most men. 

Izzet Pasha and some few other ill-disposed Turks have created just 
dissatisfaction amongst some of the mountaineers. Izzet is recalled, and the 
others will be removed from authority. The Porte is ready to take any 
measures for ensuring to the Syrians the reward of their loyalty to the Sultan. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 101. 
Mr. Wood to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Beyrout, November 10, 1840. 


HIS Excellency Selim Pasha has dictated to me the inclosed letter of 
thanks to your Lordship, for the honour his Sovereign has been graciously pleased 
to confer upon him, in promoting him to the rank of Ferik. 

I avail myself of the opportunity to do justice to the honourable conduct 
of Selim Pasha, in his important command in Syria under so many trying 
circumstances, and to express my personal obligations to him for the readiness 
with which he has complied with all my suggestions and wishes, and for the 
assistance he has given me in every instance. 

In repeating my thanks to your Lordship for his Highness the Grand 
Vizier’s letter to me, giving me authority to interfere in the administration and 
in the arrangements of the civil affairs of Syria, I take the liberty of inclosing 
herewith a letter of thanks to his Highness under a flying seal. 

Anxious not to betray the confidence reposed in me, I have made use of 
the authority of the Sublime Porte for the best interests of the Sultan, as far as 
it lays in my power, without, however, overstepping the limits which prudence, 
discretion, and delicacy towards the Turkish officers here impose upon me. [f 
~ am greatly indebted to his Excellency the Moushteshar Effendi, whose amiable 
and conciliating disposition is beyond all praise, for his ready compliance with, 
and hearty co-operation in, all my demands. It is, however, but proper to state, 
that there remains yet a great deal to be done, which must be left for after 
considerations. In the mean time the greatest caution and prudence is required 
to conciliate the people, and please and content all parties,—a delicate task in a 
country where there are so many interests all clashing with each other, and 
where there are so many petty chiefs, who are reluctant to forego the right of 
governing their Clients in the manner of their forefathers, im favour of an 
enlightened and general system of administration. 

In proportion as difficulties of this nature occur, I will take the liberty of 
noting them to your Lordship. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) RICHARD WOOD. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 101. 
Mr. Wood to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Beyrout, November 17, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to inclose herewith the translation of a letter 
addressed to me by his Excellency Selim Pasha, informing me of the evacuation 


- Paw te 2 ‘ ag Wie i 
PT ee ae ee ee ee ee 


104 


of Jaffa by the Egyptians. Selim Aga, Bim-Bashi, deserted to Acre with 800 
men, but unfortunately the mountaineers attacked him on the road, killed about 
200 of them, and allowed the remainder to proceed to join the Turkish troops in 
a state of nudity. 

Ibrahim Bey, Brigadier-General, who commanded at Jaffa, retired with only 
a part of his troops, but the inhabitants arrested Mustapha Bey, the Colonel, and 
the officers that were with him, who are to be sent prisoners to Acre. 

The possession of Jaffa will leave the Egyptians at Jerusalem no means of 
effecting their escape. The country, without exception, around them, is up in 
arms, and I am in hopes that the surrender of that important place will speedily 
follow. Jerusalem is surrounded by a strong wall, and is situated on the 
summit of lofty mountains, where it would be difficult to transport cannon. It 
could therefore be easily defended by a small number of Turkish soldiers, in the 
event of its surrender, which will be worth the sacrifice, as its inland position 
would render it invaluable in cutting off completely Ibrahim Pasha’s retreat to 
Egypt. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) RICHARD WOOD. 


Inclosure 3 in No. 101. 
Selim Pasha to Mr. Wood. 
(Translation.) 


Sincere Friend, &c. 15th Ramazan, 1257. 

ON the 14th of the month Ramazan I received a letter from the inhabitants 
of Jaffa, as also a petition from Mustapha Bey, apprising me of the flight of the 
Egyptian General, Mustapha Bey, with his troops, the moment he learned from 
the fugitives that Acre was taken. 

Mustapha Bey, Colonel in the Egyptian Army, endeavoured to follow him, 
but was prevented by the inhabitants, whose demand to have some troops sent 
for the protection and defence of the castle I have submitted to their Excellencies 
Izzet Pasha and the Admiral, and I hope they will speedily honour me with 
their answers. 

I have also given orders for the removal of Mustapha Bey to this place. 

I have great pleasure in informing you, that a Bim-Bashi with S00 men 
have joined us, and trusting to your friendship to do the needful, &c., _ 

(Signed) SELIM MUHAMED. 


Inclosure 4 in No. 101. 
Mr. Wood to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Beyrout, November 19, 1840. 


THE evacuation of Jaffa by the Egyptians has been followed by that of 
Jerusalem in the manner stated in the letter I have the honour to inclose 
herewith from the Kady or Judge of that place. 

The mountains of Naplouse, as well as the capital of that district, have 
also returned to their allegiance to the Sultan, and have received the Governors 
appointed by his Excellency Selim Pasha. 

The influential and powerful family of El Hadi was the chief support of 
Mehemet Ali's power in the South of Syria, the principal members of it holding 
the most lucrative and important commands under him. 

At the capture of Acre, Sheik Mahmoud Abdul Hadi, the Superintendent- 
General, fled to Naplouse, and endeavoured apparently, according to the letter 
of the present Civil Governor of Acre inclosed, to reunite his friends 
and form a party against us. His efforts happily proving ineffectual, he has 
conformed to circumstances, and has tried to make amends for his past dis- 
loyalty by calling on the Sheiks of the different tribes of that neighbourhood to 
return to their allegiance to the Sultan. 


105 


Although, from what has come to my knowledge respecting the pro- 
ceedings of this Mahmoud Abdul Hadi, I am far from placing reliance in his 
protestations of loyalty set forth in his letter; yet I have advised his 
Excellency Izzet Pasha 'to use him kindly, and to endeavour to withdraw 
him from the districts where he enjoys the greatest influence, by inviting him to 
come to Beyrout, by which, a useful servant may be secured to the Government 
hereafter. There is no doubt, however, but what his submission is as advan- 
tageous to us as it is ruinous to the cause of Mehemet Ali in the South. 
The securing of this family renders the possession of Naplouse a matter of 
still greater importance. 

Previous to my departure from Acre, I had the satisfaction of procuring an 
interview, through my friend Sheik Said Abdul-Al, with the Chiefs of the 
districts of 


Djebel-el Koura—Jousef and Salah. 

Barakat Djebel Ferish—Kahlan Meflik, Effendi Homan. 

Djauamat Mersouk Dadiji—El Meshalik, Mufti, and Hassan al Aly. 
Salt—Nimr el Suleiman. 


And of the Sheiks of the Arab tribes of 


Araban el Sakem—Rahab. 

Abad—Mufti and Abr el Heby. 

Arabrbeni Saher—Nimr el Suleiman. 

El Edivan—Salek el Amondik, Mohamed el Kaid. 
Arabr el Balka—Abdul Aziz el Minof. 


All of whom declared that, as true Mussulmans, they were not only bound to 
acknowledge the Sultan as their only true and legitimate master, but that they 
were enjoined to fight all who rebelled or took up arms against him. 

I procured from his Excellency Selim Pasha separate Boyourouldis for them, 
and robes of honour, according to their custom, and dismissed them highly 
satisfied, and sincere in their professions of allegiance to their lawful Sovereign. 

Sheik Said Abd el Al informs me also, that the Turcoman Chief Sheik 
Halfi Turkman is actively employed in making preparations to drive back 
Ibrahim Pasha’s advanced posts on his left flank, and that he will endeavour 
to detach from the Egyptian Army the Emir el Fadl, with the Bedouin 
cavalry that is under his command. 

The Bedouin Sheiks, as far south-east as Balka and Mikelka, are all come 
in to offer their services; Naplouse, Jaffa, Jerusalem, Hebron, Janin, Nazaret, 
Tiberias, Saffet, &c., are all now governed by native officers duly appointed by 
their Excellencies Izzet Pasha and Selim Pasha; and all the Arab Sheiks of the 
tribes occupying the intermediate districts have received personally their Bo- 
yourouldis from the same authorities. All the country, therefore, south and east 
of Acre, as far as El-Arish, except Gaza, Hebron, the Dead Sea, Salt, El Sedja, 
&c., have acknowledged and have submitted to the authority of the Sultan. 

In announcing the foregoing effects of His Highness’s arms and influence in 
these countries, I beg respectfully to offer my congratulations to your Lordship 
on the entire submission of the whole of Palestine and Judea to the Sublime 
Porte. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) RICHARD WOOD. 


Inclosure 5 in No. 101. 
The Kady Mollah’s Letter on the Surrender of Jerusalem. 
(Translation. ) 
After the usual compliments. 14th Ramazan. 
ON the receipt of the noble Boyourouldi at the Mehkeme of Jerusalem, 


apprising us of the taking of all the sea-coast towns, of the submission of 
Mount Lebanon, and of all the inhabitants of those parts, as well as of the 


106 


panic and discomfiture of the Egyptian troops, I invited to my Divan the great 
and the small, the rich and the poor, on the 13th night of the holy month of 
Ramazan, and had it read publicly to them; who one and all responded, ‘‘ We 
have heard, and we have obeyed ; and have demanded that Seid Hussein Rechid 
Effendi should be confirmed in his civil government.” 

The 200 Egyptians, soldiers that composed the garrison of Jerusalem, 
have submitted, and have surrendered the castle. Mohamed Aga, with his 
300 horsemen, have followed their example; I have attached them to the Civil 
Governor, but I have to request that 200 Turkish troops may be sent imme- 
diately, as a matter of great necessity, to deliver up to them the castle, and the 
gates of the town. By the will of the Almighty, all have returned to their 
allegiance to the Sublime Porte, and have expressed their contentment, not 
outwardly, but from the bottom of their hearts. 

The public registers will be sent hereafter ; in the mean time, letters have 
been sent to the Governors of Gaza, Ramah, Jericho, Naplouse, Djebel-el- 
Rahman and Djebel Halil, to present themselves. With the assistance of the 
Almighty, the population of all these places will readily tender their submis- 
sion; and repeating my request that a few Turkish troops may be sent without 
delay, 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) (L.S.) MOHAMED HAMED AGA, 
Kady of Jerusalem. 


Inclosure 6 in No. 101. 
Seid Abd el Al, Governor of Acre, to Mr. Wood. 


(‘Translation.) 


Le 1'7 Ramazan, 1256. 


APRES Varrivée des forces des Alliés et celles du Sultan devant les murs 
d’Acre, la destruction des forts de la ville, et la fuite de tous les habitans 
rebelles quis’y trouvaient, et qui, ne pouvant pas s’éloigner, ont été arrétés, ona 
bien vu que le Chéik Mahmud Abdul Hadi, ex-Gérant d’ Acre, aprés sa fuite s’est 
réuni avec son neveu Chéik Suliman el Hessen, ex-Gouverneur de Naplous, 
avec leurs familles et leurs gens, pour jurer fidélité au Gouverneur Egyptien 
(c’est-a-dire, d’étre rebelles au Sultan). A ce sujet nous avons jugé nécessaire 
de nommer Chéik Zadig el Jamain Gouverneur de Naplous, étant resté fidéle 4 la 
cause du Sultan, d’aprés un boyourouldi de Sélim Pacha; il a été pourvu 
d’armes, et est parti pour Naplous afin d’attaquer ’ennemi. On a nommé 
aussi! Mohammed el Yerar Gouverneur de Jamin, et aussitot que la famille 
d’Abdul Hadi le sut, il ne pensa qu’a fuir de la ville; ils envoyérent un d’eux Ase 
présenter auprés de son Excellence Sélim Pacha pour se soumettre: ils obtinrent 
un boyourouldi pour leur stireté. Son Excellence Sélim Pacha ordonna que leurs 
Chefs lui soient. présentés, et le porteur du dit ordre est parti hier ; et aujourd’hui 
les dits Chefs sont arrivés et se sont présentés auprés de son Excellence pour se 
soumettre & la cause du Sultan, en demandant & son Excellence une portion 
d’armes pour attaquer les Egyptiens, afin que par ce moyen ils pussent obtenir 
leur liberté. Mais je suis d’opinion qu’ils font cause commune avec Ibrahim 
Pacha, étant reconnus comme vrais partisans du Gouvernement Egyptien: ils 
se flattaient que le dit Gouvernement serait toujours victorieux dans ces pro- 
vinces, ayant eu les emplois les plus honorifiques, comme cela vous aura été 
deja rapporté. Ils disent avoir été attachés a la cause du Sultan: pourquoi donc 
ne l’ont-ils pas fait avant la destruction des murs d’Acre ? 

Le dit Gérant ne s’est pas rendu. Ila échappé aprés avoir vu que la 
citadelle ne résistait plus ; et pour vous prouver davantage, il y a dix jours 
qu’Acre est & notre pouvoir, et ils n’y sont retournés que ce matin, aprés avoir 
observé leur mauvaise position, et leurs intéréts, qwils n’avaient aucun espoir 
au commandement de Naplous, car il était déja occupé. 

Prenant en considération le tout, vous remarquerez que leur présence ici 
n’est pas utile, et peut-étre occasionnera des dissensions parmi les gens qui sont 
soumis au Sultan; et je suppose aussi, qu’étant attachés aux Egyptiens ils 


5 


107 


souléveront une portion de la montagne de Naplous en leur faveur, et de cette 
maniére les pays ne peuvent jouir de la tranquillité. 

Comme je suis un serviteur trés-attaché au Sultan, je prends la liberté de 
vous donner mon opinion que leur départ de la Syrie serait nécessaire comme 
celle de ’Emir Béchir l’a été. 


(Translation.) 


17th Ramazan, 1256. 


AFTER the arrival of the forces of the Allies and of the Sultan before the 
walls of Acre, the destruction of the forts of the city, and the flight of all the rebel 
inhabitants who were there, and who not being able to escape were arrested, it was 
evident that Sheik Mahmoud Abdul-Hadi, ex-Governor of Acre, after his flight, had 
joined his nephew Sheik Soliman el Hessen, ex-Governor of Naplouse, together with 
their families and people, in order to swear allegiance to the Egyptian Governor 
(that is to say, to become rebels to the Sultan). In this matter, we have thought 
it expedient, according to a Boyouruldi of Selim Pasha, to name Sheik Zadig el 
Jamain Governor of Naplouse, he having remained faithful to the cause of the Sul- 
tan; he has been furnished with arms, and has set out for Naplouse in order to attack 
the enemy. Mohammed el Yerar has also been named Governor of Jamin, and 
as soon as the family of Abdul-Hadi knew this, he thought of nothing but of 
escaping from the town; they sent one of their number to present himself to 
his Excellency Selim Pasha, to offer their submission: they obtained a Boyou- 
ruldi for their safety. His Excellency Selim Pasha ordered that their Chiefs 
should be presented to him, and the bearer of this order set out yesterday; and 
to-day, the said Chiefs have arrived, and have presented themselves before his 
Excellency to make their submission to the Sultan’s cause, asking his Excellency 
for arms to attack the Egyptians, in order that by this means they may obtain 
their liberty. But I am of opinion, that they make common cause with Ibrahim 
Pasha, being known as sure partizans of the Egyptian Government; they flattered 
themselves that that Government would be always victorious in those provinces, 
having held the most honourable employments, as has already been reported to 
you. They say they have been attached to the cause of the Sultan; why then did 
they not do so before the destruction of the walls of Acre? 

The aforesaid Governor has not surrendered himself. He fled on perceiving 
that the citadel no longer resisted, and in further proof of this, it is ten days 
since Acre has been in our power, and they have only returned this morning, on 
observing their awkward position, and the state of their interests, and that they 
had no hope of the command of Naplouse, for it was already occupied. 

Taking the whole into consideration, you will remark that their presence 
here is of no use, and may occasion dissensions among those who have submitted 
to the Sultan; and I think also, that being attached to the Egyptians, they will 
raise part of the mountain of Naplouse in their favour, and thus the country can- 
not enjoy tranquillity. 

As I am a most attached servant of the Sultan, I take the liberty of giving 
it as my opinion that their departure from Syria would be as necessary as that of 
the Emir Bechir has been. 


Inclosure 7 in No, 101. 
Mahmud Abdul-Hadi and Solyman El Hessen to Mr. Wood. 


(Translation. ) 


Le 15 Ramazan, 1256. 


J’AI fait chercher tous les Chéiks de la montagne de Jérusalem pour leur 
conseiller de se soumettre au Sultan. Jusqu’’ ce jour les Chéiks du cote de 
Rémy Salem, qui sont Chéik Abdul Hamed, Chéik Mustafa Abrunihareb ; et 
aussi les Chéiks du cété de Bémine, qui sont le Chéik Hassan-ell Hayferris, 
Chéik Abdul Azig, Chéik Ahmed Abroguide ; et je les ai prévenu que le Sultan 
avait déchu Méhémet Ali du Pachalic d’Egypte, qu’il avait deja fait marcher 

P 2 


108 


ses troupes tant par terre que par mer pour détruire les troupes du dit rebelle ; et 
de Varrivée de Son Altesse Izzet Mohamed Pacha a Beyrout, honore des 
commandemens de Saida, Tripoli, et Généralissime de toute la Syrie, et de la 
Vice-Royauté du Pachalic d’Egypte; leur ajoutant les victoires remportées 
sur ’ennemi Ibrahim Pacha, et la prise de plus de 15,000 hommes de ses troupes, 
ayant été obligé de fuir lui-méme ; que toutes les populations de Saida, Tripoli, 
les montagnes, et tous ses environs, comme aussi les montagnes de Naplous, se 
sont soumis au Sultan, qui a aboli les monopoles établis par Ibrahim Pacha, 
comme les Ferdés, &c. ; en leur faisant aussi un rapport de la prise d’Acre, qui les 
a beaucoup étonnés, et que tous ceux qui se soumettraient au Sultan, et qui 
s’exposeront a rendre des services, auront la parfaite tranquillité et seront armés 
par son Altesse Izzet Pacha pour se battre contre les troupes Egyptiennes qui 
sont a leur voisinage, afin de cerner les chemins pour qu’aucune communication 
n’aie lieu avec l’ennemi. Mon rapport fit une telle impression auprés des sus- 
mentionnés Chéiks, qu’ils jurérent soumission au Sultan, et rendront tous les 
services en leur pouvoir. 

Comme on a déja représenté & son Altesse Izzet Pacha, lui demandant des 
armes et munitions pour les habitans de la montagne de Naplous, il est 
urgent d’envoyer 2,000 fusils de plus de ceux qui ont déja été demandés, et que 
ces derniers serviront pour les habitans de la montagne de Jérusalem. 

Il est arrivé aujourd’hui le Chéik Sami-el-Adruen, cousin du Chéik 
Suliman El-Shibly-el-Aduen, qui est le Chéik des Bedouins du Balbec, pour nous 
prier de vous faire demander un boyourouldi pour leur tranquillité. 

J’ajouterai ma priére pour vous demander deux autres boyourouldis, dont 
Yun pour les Chéiks des Bédouins du Mikellua, qui se nomment Chéik Salil- 
el-favur et Chéik Sahur-er-Battia ; et le second pour les Chéiks des Bedouins 
nommés Abad, qui sont Chéik Fendi, le Chéik Kabalan, Chéik Fadil, et le 
Chéik Mussalt-Isse ; pour leur sireté et pour battre les troupes qui se trouvent 
avec le Kaftan Agassi d’Ibrahim Pacha. 


(Translation.) 
15th Ramazan, 1256. 


I HAVE sent for all the Sheiks of the Mountain of Jerusalem to advise 
them to submit to the Sultan. Up to this day, [I have communicated with] 
the Sheiks of Remy Salem, who are, Sheik Abdul Hamed, Sheik Mustafa 
Abrunihareb; and also the Sheiks of Bemin, who are, the Sheik Hassan- 
ell Hayferris, Sheik Abdul Azig, Sheik Ahmed Abroguide; and I have 
informed them that the Sultan had deprived Mehemet Ali of the Pashalic of 
Egypt; that he had already advanced both his land and sea forces to destroy 
the troops of that rebel; and that his Highness Izzet Mohamed Pasha had 
arrived at Beyrout, honoured with the commands of Sidon and Tripoli, of Ge- 
neralissimo of all Syria, and of the Viceroyalty of the Pashalic of Egypt; adding 
the account of the victories gained over the enemy, Ibrahim Pasha, the capture 
of more than 15,000 of his troops, he himself having been obliged to fly: that all 
the people of Sidon and Tripoli, the Mountains and their environs, as well as 
the Mountains of Naplouse, have submitted to the Sultan, who has abolished 
the monopolies established by Ibrahim Pasha, such as the Ferdehs, &c.; 
giving them also an account of the capture of Acre, which greatly astonished 
them, and informing them that all who should submit to the Sultan, and who 
will come forward in his service, shall have perfect security, and shall be armed 
by his Highness Izzet Pasha to fight the Egyptian troops in their vicinity, in 
order to blockade the roads, that no communication may take place with the 
enemy. My account had such an effect upon the above-named Sheiks, that 
they swore submission to the Sultan, and will render all the service in their 
power. 

As a representation has been already made to his Highness Izzet Pasha, 
asking him for arms and’ ammunition for the inhabitants of the Mountain 
of Naplouse, it is urgently necessary to send 2,000 muskets more than those 
already applied for, and these will serve for the inhabitants of the Mountain 
of Jerusalem. 

The Sheik Sami-el-Adruen, cousin of the Sheik Suliman E]-Shibly-el 
Aduen, who is the Sheik of the Bedouins of Balbec, arrived to-day to beg us 
to request a boyouruldi for their security. , 


109 


I shall add a request, and beg of you two other boyouruldis, one for the 
Sheiks of the Bedouins of Mikellua, who are called Sheik Salil-el-Favur and 
Sheik Sahur-er-Battia; and the second for the Sheiks‘of the Bedouins called 
Abad: these are Sheik Fendi, Sheik Kabalan, Sheik Fadil, and the Sheik 
Mussalt-Isse ; for their security, and in order to fight the troops who are with 
Ibrahim Pasha’s Kaftan Agassi. 


Inclosure 8 in No. 101. 
Said Abd el Al, Governor of Acre, to Mr. Wood. 
(Translation.) 


Le 18 Ramazan, 1256. 


APRES la prise d’Acre j’ai écrit 4 plusieurs Chefs, parmi lesquels au 
Chéik Halfi Turkman, qui est une personne de beaucoup d’influence, en le 
prévenant de cerner les chemins aux troupes Egyptiennes, et de tenter 4 un 
petit mouvement vers Damas, et le suppliant de nous mettre au fait des nouvelles 
de ces parages. Je viens de recevoir la réponse qui me fait savoir, qu’A Mézarib 
il ya un certain Kaftan Agassi avec 1,000 cavaliers irréguliers, et 800 réguliers, 
et Mohammed Aga Bashi Bozouk, avec des troupes d’Ibrahim Pacha; en 
ajoutant qu’il va expédier des lettres pour l’Emir El-Fades (Bédouin) pour le 
persuader de se rendre du coté du Sultan, ou qu’ils restassent neutres; il m’a 
assuré aussi que toutes communications avec les provinces attenantes sont 
empéchées; seulement un seul convoi de provisions parti de Damas, et 
escorté de 250 cavaliers, a pass¢. II] ajoute qu’une personne de Lajia nommée 
Sétan, suivait, croyant que c’était un Chef des Bédouins qui passait. Au 
contraire, le dit Sétan a réuni des troupes pour la cause du Sultan contre Kaftan 
Agassi. | 

Ibrahim Pacha s’est retiré avec ses troupes 4 Zabedian, et je me fais un 
devoir de vous le faire savoir. 


(Translation.) 


18th Ramazan, 1256. 


AFTER the capture of Acre, I wrote to several Chiefs, and amongst 
them to the Sheik Halfi Turkman, who is a person of much influence, 
instructing him to cut off the communication of the Egyptian troops, and to 
attempt a slight movement in the direction of Damascus, and begging him to 
keep us informed of the intelligence from that quarter. I have just received 
an answer, which informs me, that there is one Kaftan Agassi at Mezarib 
with 1,000 irregular and 800 regular cavalry, and Mohammed Aga Bashi 
Bozouk with some of Ibrahim Pasha’s troops; adding, that he is about to 
send letters to the Emir El-Fades (Bedouin) to persuade him to side with the 
Sultan or remain neutral: he has assured me also that all communications 
with the adjoining provinces are cut off; only one convoy of provisions from 
Damascus with an escort of 250 cavalry has passed. He adds, that a person 
of Lajia, by name Setan, followed them, thinking that it was a Chief of 
Bedouins who was passing. On the other hand, this Setan has assembled 
troops in the Sultan’s cause against Kaftan Agassi. 

Ibrahim Pasha has retired with his troops to Zabedian, and I consider it 
my duty to let you know this circumstance. 


Inclosure 9 in No. 10]. 


Mr. Wood to Viscount Ponsonby. 
My Lord, Beyrout, November 19, 1840 


I HAVE the honour to inform your Lordship that I returned to Beyrout, 
on the 15th instant, from the mountains, where I had been to see and commu- 


110 


nicate verbally with the Emir Bechir on subjects relating to the present crisis 
of affairs in the country ; as also to collect correct information of the movements 
of the enemy and their effective force, the positions they occupied, and the com- 
munications that were still open to them, and the state of their Commissariat 
and Supplies. 

Ibrahim Pasha’s camp at Malaca (a place adjoining Zahlé) is composed of 
10,000 Infantry, two squadrons of Lancers (about 1,000 men), and 1,000 
Irregular Cavalry. He is intrenched, and he has with him thirteen field- 
pieces. At Yebdané, a village five hours or leagues from Malaca, there are 
2,000 Infantry and 500 Cavalry to guard the road, and at Balbec, four hours 
from Malaca, 500 Kurdish Cavalry. 

Besides the above, he has stationed his Kaftan Agassi (Master of the 
Wardrobe) in the Haouran, six hours from Damascus, with two battalions of 
Infantry, 600 Cavalry, and three field-pieces; and his Madjoun Agassi at 
Mezarib, twelve hours from Katmin, with two battalions of Infantry, and 700 
Bedouin Cavalry. At Homs and Hamah there are only four battalions of the 
Line. The Egyptian forces, therefore, in the South amount to about 14,500. 
Infantry and 4,500 Cavalry, besides the garrison of Damascus. Ahmed 
Meneckly Pasha is in the direction of Aleppo with eight battalions of Infantry 
(if complete, 6,400) and 1,000 Cuirassiers, and a certain Ahmed Bey Ebin 
Mursaloglu-deb-Hauk has been named Pasha, and sent from the camp to 
Aleppo to collect, it is said, the troops that are in the North. 

If any reliance can be put in the reports lately circulated, the Egyptian 
forces concentrated in the North, near or at Aleppo, amount to about 15,000 
men. It appears to me, however, from the accounts I have received at various 
periods of the movements of the different regiments, that their numbers are 
greatly exaggerated ; and it is evident, besides, that if Ibrahim Pasha possessed 
such a force on the frontiers, he would not have had recourse to the hard 
expedient of abandoning Koulek-Bogas in the Taurus, destroying the works 
there, and spiking nearly 500 brass cannon. 

The Egyptian troops have been withdrawn from Tarsus, Adana, Marash, 
Aintab, Orfa,'and Antioch. The 500 Druse Cavalry that were quartered at Al 
Boston have deserted to Malatia, and of the three regiments that were retiring 
from Marash, one fled into the Desert near Aleppo—the other two were 
prevented, with difficulty, from following their example. 

From the annexed approximate Estimate of the Egyptian Army, its actual 
amount may be fairly stated to vary from 24,000 to 26,000 effective men; but 
as the Mousteshar Effendi has faithfully promised me to-day that he would incur 
the expence of sending intelligent emissaries to the North to ascertain both their 
numbers and their condition, | hope to be able soon to furnish your Lordship 
with more positive and satisfactory information on this head. 

The principal depéts of the Egyptian army are at Damascus and Homs, 
from whence he procures his supplies, however with great difficulty and risk. 
He is obliged to detach strong bodies of Cavalry to escort the convoys, to 
protect them from being captured by the armed mountaineers, who are in pos- 
session of some of the passes of Anti-Libanus. Notwithstanding these pre- 
cautions, only a few days since, a large convoy of 400 mules and camels was 
captured by the people of the Haouran, who killed 200 of the escort. In revenge, 
he has sent his Kaftan Agassi into their country to pillage and destroy it, but 
fortunately they have surrounded him, although they cannot drive him away 
from his position, which he defends with three pieces of cannon. 

The famous Druse warrior Sheik Shibli-el-Argan has joined Ibrahim from 
Marash with 400 Druse horsemen. Immediately on his arrival, he put himself 
in communication with the Emir Bechir, whom he begged to procure for him and 
his men a Boyourouldi from his Excellency Izzet Pasha, promising him and his 
men their arrears of pay; when he would join us, and bring with him as many 
of the Egyptian forces as he could entice away. The moment the Emir Bechir 
apprized me of this circumstance, I lost no time in making the necessary 
arrangements to secure the co-operation of this Sheik, from whose undoubted 
rns and known fame I anticipate many valuable services in the cause of the 

ultan. | 

I subjoin an extract from Halil Pasha’s letter, which will convey to your 
Lordship both the panic that has seized the Egyptians, and the expedients to 
which Ibrahim Pasha has recourse to to intimidate the people, who are more 
afraid of the Albanians and Irregular troops than of the Nizam, 


Il 


“ Sheriff Pasha has dispersed the band of the 6th Regiment that was at 
Damascus, and has turned the privates into a body of Irregulars, whom he 
armed, and sent to a place called Sakra, together with a body of Irregular Cavalry. 
On some of the fugitives joining them, and informing them that Acre was 
captured in three hours, praise be to the Almighty, fear came over their hearts, 
and they fled back to Damascus, where, however, Sheriff punished them, and 
forced them to return to their aforesaid place. On their march thither, about 
sixteen of them, officers and privates, ran away to Saida, and on inquiring of 
them the state of Ibrahim’s army, they answered, ‘It is all over with Ibrahim 
this time: we are only waiting for the appearance of the Sultan’s troops, when 
we will desert. This is our intention, and we are only looking out for some 
mélée or other to afford us an opportunity.’ ” | 

I believe this feeling to be universal in the Egyptian Army, and it is not, 
therefore, surprising if, with such disaffected and disorganized troops, Ibrahim 
should not dare to move out of his intrenchments, or that he should be obliged 
to put officers for sentries to prevent desertion at night. Whenever the Sultan’s 
troops are led on, they are sure of victory. It will be the signal for the general 
dispersion of the Egyptian Army in Syria, the destruction of which I consider 
inevitable, if advantage be taken in time of the enthusiasm and the spirit that 
seems to animate the people. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) RICHARD WOCD. 


Inclosure 10 in No. 101. 
Approximate Estimate of the Egyptian Forces in Syria. 


Beyrout, November 19, 1840. 
16 Regiments of Infantry, at 3,200 men . 51,200 Effective 32,000 


5 Regiments of Regular Cavalry, at 700 men 3,500 J 3,000 
2 Squadrons of Cuirassiers : ‘ - ' 000 5 1,000 
Irregular Cavalry and Infantry, about . 10,000 A 10,000 
65,700 46,000 

Prisoners and deserters, nearly E . 15,000 

One Regiment that fled to the Desert . 2,000 

Druse Cavalry that fled to Malatia i. 500 


Dispersed Syrians and Egyptians, about 2,500 


20,000 


Total of the effective Egyptian forces remaining in Syria 26,000 


(Signed) | RICHARD WOOD. 
RAR Sprtehs. aise wert hd as VTA ALA SE AG hh oh, Pale eS a Ue 


No. 102 
Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston —(Received December 28.) 


My Lord, Paris, December 25, 1840. 


I THIS morning told M. Guizot, that the Baron de Bourqueney, 
whose attention had been called by your Lordship to that passage of 
Commodore Napier’s letter which states the arrival of a new French 
Negotiator at Alexandria, had observed that the person to whom that 
passage alluded must have been M. de Beaufort. 

"  M., Guizot said, this might very possibly be the case ; for, at the time 
he came into office, Captain Beaufort, who had served in the Egyptian 
Army in Syria, was waiting at Toulon for a passage to Alexandria, charged 
with instructions from M. Thiers to proceed to Egypt and Syria, for the 
purpose of reporting to the French Government the state of the war in 


112 


Syria, and the result to be expected from the operations of the Allies 
against the Army of Ibrahim Pasha; and he (M. Guizot) had not inter- 
posed to prevent Captain Beaufort from proceeding to execute his 
instructions. 

I have, &c., 


; (Signed) GRANVILLE. 


No. 103. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received December 31.) 


_ (Extract.> ' Therapia, December 8, 1840. 


I RECEIVED on the 6th at night, from Commodore Napier, a copy 
of the Convention he signed with Boghos Bey at Alexandria, on the 26th 
of November, 1840, and I immediately communicated it to the Porte and 
to my Colleagues. 

Your Lordship has received the Commodore’s report upon the subject, 
and I have only to acquaint you, that the Sublime Porte has formally 
declared the Convention to be null and void; and that my Colleagues and 
myself concur in the declaration; and further, that I have written official 
letters to Admiral Stopford, to Commodore Napier, Consul Larking at 
Alexandria, to the officer in command of Her Majesty’s ships at Beyrout, 
to the commanding officer of the British troops in Syria, and to Mr. 
Consul Moore,—-the purport of which is to make known the declaration of 
the Sublime Porte, and to prevent, as far as may be in my power, the 
carrying into execution any part of the Convention. 

It is unnecessary for me to say, that no Government in the position 
of the Ottoman Porte could, for one moment, tolerate the assumption by 
an individual of the right to treat for it with any Power, whether exist- 
ing de gure or de facto in the guise of a rebel Power. Her Majesty’s 
Ambassador is wholly unauthorized to recognize the act of an individual 
unprovided with powers by Her Majesty’s Government; and the Ministers 
of Austria, Prussia, and Russia are equally unauthorized to recognize the 
acts of a person so circumstanced. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 103. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Sir Robert Stopford. 


Sir, Therapia, December 7, 1840. 

I HAVE the honour to inclose, for your information, copy of a 
despatch I have sent to Commodore Napier, wherein you will find my 
official statement of the fact, that the Sublime Porte has formally pro- 
tested against a Convention, signed “Charles Napier, Commodore, 
Boghos Bey,” dated from the “‘ Medea” steamer, Alexandria, November 
27, 1840; and further, that the Representatives of the Four Allied Powers 
concur with the Sublime Porte in declaring that Convention null and void 
ab initio, and that Commodore Napier had no authority or right 
whatsoever to make that Convention. 

I beg leave to express my hope, that you may judge it to be expedient 
to exert your authority, to prevent the said Convention being carried into 
execution in any degree whatsoever ; and that, if it should be in progress 
of execution, you will order that progress to be completely arrested, and 
put a stop to, if within your power, however far advanced it may be 
towards its termination ; I mean, that if the troops of Ibrahim should be 
actually at sea, and on their way to Egypt, you will cause them to be 
seized and reconducted to the place from whence they may have been 
taken in Syria, which, we presume, it may be not difficult to do by means 
of the steamers. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


a SSS 


113 


Inclosure 2 in No. 103. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Commodore Napier. 


(Extract.) Therapia, December 7, 1840. 


I HAD the honour last night to receive your communication of a 
Convention, dated “ Medea” steamer, Alexandria, November 27, 1840, 
signed “ Charles Napier, Commodore, Boghos Bey.” 

I immediately laid that Convention before the Sublime Porte, and 
acquainted my Colleagues, the Austrian Internuncio, the Prussian Envoy, 
and the Russian Chargé d’Affaires, with it. It is my duty to acquaint you, 
that the Sublime Porte has made a formal protest against your acts, 
declaring, that you have no power or authority whatever to justify what 
you have done, and that the Convention is null and void. 

My Colleagues, above-mentioned, and myself entirely concur with the 
Sublime Porte. 

I have sent copy of this despatch to Admiral the Honourable Sir 
Robert Stopford, and also to Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State 
for Foreign Affairs. 


Inclosure 3 in No. 103. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Mr. Consul Larking. 


Sir, Therapia, December 7, 1840. 


I HAVE to acquaint you for your guidance in the discharge of your 
duties, and for the information of all persons within your Consular juris- 
diction, that the Sublime Porte, with the full approbation and concurrence 
of the Representatives of the Four Allied Powers parties to the Con- 
vention of the 15th of July, 1840, has formally protested against, and 
declared null and void ab initio, a Convention, dated from Alexandria the 
27th of November, 1840, and signed “ Charles Napier, Commodore, 
Boghos Bey.” 

You will be pleased to observe, that it is your duty to oppose, to the 
best of your power, the carrying any part of the aforesaid Convention into 
effect, inasmuch as it is not based upon any authority whatever. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 4 in No. 103. 


Viscount Ponsonby to the Officer commanding the British Naval Forces. 
off Beyrout. 


Sir, Therapia, December 7, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to inclose, for your information, copy of a 
despatch I have sent to Commodore Napier, wherein you will find my 
official statement of the fact, that the Sublime Porte has formally pro- 
tested against a Convention, signed “Charles Napier, Commodore, 
Boghos Bey,’ dated from the “ Medea” steamer, Alexandria, November 
27th, 1840; and further, that the Representatives of the Four Allied 
Powers concur with the Sublime Porte in declaring that Convention null 
and void ab initio, and that Commodore Napier had no authority or right 
to make that Convention. 

I beg leave to express my hope that you may judge it to be expedient 
to exert your authority to prevent the said Convention being carried into 
execution in any degree whatsoever ; and that if it should be in progress 
of execution, you will order that progress to be completely arrested, and 
put a stop to, if within your power, however far advanced it may be 
towards its termination; J mean that if the troops of Ibrahim should be 


Q 


114 


actually at sea, and on their way to Egypt, you will cause them to be 
seized and reconducted to the place from whence they may have been 
taken in Syria, which we presume it may not be difficult to do by means. 
of the steamers. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 5 in No. 103. 


Viscount Ponsonby to the Officer commanding the British Military Forces 
in Syria. 
Sir, g Therapia, December 7, 1840. 
I HAVE the honour to acquaint you officially that the Sublime Porte, 
having had cognizance of a Convention, signed at Alexandria on the 27th 
of November, 1840, by Commodore Napier and Boghos Bey, has formally 
declared that Convention to be null and void ab initio; and I have, in 
consequence, to request you will pay no attention whatever to the pro- 
visions it contains, but that you act in the performance of your orders as 
if you had never been informed of the existence of that Convention, 
excepting in the case that there may have been a commencement of execu- 
tion of any part thereof, or some progress made therein, in which case I 
hope and I presume that you will think it your duty to exert all your 
authority and all the means at your disposition to stop its progress, or to 
seize upon any troops that may be on their route in consequence of said 
Convention, and cause them to be reconducted to that place in Syria from 
whence they may have been permitted to depart. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 6 in No. 103. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Mr. Consul Moore. 


Sir, Therapia, December 7, 1840. 


I HAVE to acquaint you that the Sublime Porte has declared null 
and void, ab initio, a Convention, dated Alexandria, 27th of November, 
1840, signed “ Charles Napier, Commodore, Boghos Bey.” 

{ beg you will make known to all persons within your Consular juris- 
diction the fact I have above stated, and that you will yourself consider 
that Convention null and void. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No. 104. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received December 31.) 


My Lord, Therapia, December 8, 1840. 


AFTER the departure of my preceding despatch, I received the 
inclosed note from M. Etienne Pisani, which I hasten to transmit to your 
Lordship, just as it came to my hands, in the hope of being in time for the 
“‘ Kstafette.”” | 

I inclose also copy of a despatch sent this day by the Sublime Porte 
to Chekib Effendi, which I have just received from the Ottoman Minister 
for Foreign Affairs. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


P.S.—I inclose copy of a note from the Sublime Porte, this moment 
received, refusing, ab initio, Commodore Napier’s Convention. 


115 


Inclosure 1 in No. 104. 


M. Etienne Pisani to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Pera, le 8 Décembre, 1840. 

DANS ce moment j’arrive de la Porte, ot j’ai rencontré Eyub Pacha, qui 
vient d’arriver & bord du “Tahri Bahri” avec des dépéches de la part de Sélim 
Pacha. Il est dit dans ces dépéches, que la Convention signée entre le Com- 
modore Napier et Méhémet Ali a été recue au camp avec une désapprobation 
Jnanime, et qu’on la considérait comme nulle et non avenue tant qu’ils n’avaient 
des instructions de la part de la Sublime Porte de s’y conformer. 

Qu Ibrahim Pacha avait quitté Zahle, et qu’il s’était retiré avec toutes ses 
troupes vers Damas, et méme qu’il en avait fait filer une partie vers l’Egypte ; 
mais Sir Charles Smith a fait marcher immédiatement un régiment sur 
Jérusalem pour tacher de les empécher d’effectuer leur retraite. 

Alep ainsi que ses environs ont été entiérement évacués par les Egyptiens, 
et sont maintenant sous lautorité exclusive de Sa Hautesse. 

J’ai Vhonneur, &c., 


(Signé) E. J. PISANI. 


(Translation.) 
My Lord, Pera, December 8, 1840. 

I HAVE this moment arrived from the Porte, where I met Eyub Pasha, 
who had just arrived on board the ‘‘’Tahri Bahri’ with despatches from 
Selim Pasha. It is stated in these despatches, that the Convention signed 
between Commodore Napier and Mehemet Ali was received in the camp 
with unanimous disapprobation, and that it was considered null and void as 
long as no instructions to conform to it were received from the Sublime 
Porte. 

That Ibrahim Pasha had quitted Zahlé, and that he had retired with all 
his troops towards Damascus, and that he had even caused a part of them to 
march towards Egypt; but Sir Charles Smith immediately marched a 
regiment to Jerusalem to endeavour to prevent their effecting their retreat. 

Aleppo, as well as its neighbourhood, have been entirely evacuated by 
the Egyptians, and are now under the exclusive authority of His Highness. 

I have the honour, &c., 
(Signed) EJ. PISANE 


Inclosure 2 in No. 104. - 


Translation of a Despatch addressed by the Sublime Porte to Chekib Effendi 
at London. 


Le 13 Chewal, 1256. (Le 8 Décembre, 1840.) 


TOUT le monde a été 4 méme d’apprécier les bonnes intentions et la 
modération dont la Sublime Porte a fait preuve envers Méhémet Ali, depuis 
Vavénement au trone de notre Auguste Maitre, tout en avisant aux moyens de 
défendre les droits et les intéréts du tréne Impérial. D?une autre part, nul ne 
peut ignorer les exigences de Vambition excessive de Méhémet Ali, et son 
obstination 4 persister, tant sous le régne de Sultan Mahmoud, que sous le 
régne actuel, dans des prétentions inadmissibles, et dans les voies qui ont pro- 
voqué les événemens qui se sont accomplis récemment; c’est pourquoi il est 
superflu d’entrer ici dans aucun détail a ce sujet. ve 

Mais indépendamment de sa conduite antérieure, et méme aprés le Traite 
heureusement conclu entre la Sublime Porte et les Quatre Puissances, M éhémet 
Ali s’est opiniatrement maintenu dans son systéme de résistance, et loin Vavoir 
eu recours 4 la clémence souveraine, il ne s’est occupé que de préparatits de 
guerre, sans vouloir tenir aucun compte ni des importantes faveurs qui lui etalent 
assurées par ce Traité, ni de limpossibilité absolue de le modifier, et fermant les 
yeux non seulement sur les avantages personnels qu'il aurait recueillis de son 
acceptation et sur les conséquences facheuses auxquelles il s’exposait par un 
refus, mais encore sur les nombreux succés qui ont couronneé nos operations en 
Syrie, et sur les répugnances et le mécontentement qu’ont fait eclater contre lui- 
méme les habitans de l’Egypte. 6 A 


116 


La Sublime Porte, au contraire, a scrupuleusement conformé tous ses actes 
aux stipulations du Traité, en prononcant, apres s’étre concertée avec les Repre- 
sentans des Quatre Puissances, la destitution de Méhémet Ali, qui lui était 
imposée par l’obligation de garantir ses intéréts présens et a venir. 

Aujourd’bui, et aprés tout ce qui vient d’étre exposé, comment pourrait- 
on confier de nouveau l’autorité 4 un homme tel que Méhémet Ali? Toutefois, 
et quoique le Sultan n’ait pas l’intention de rien accorder, de sa propre volonté, a 
Méhémet Ali, néanmoins, en cas d’une demande de la part des Grandes Puis- 
sances, il est possible que, par déférence pour elles, quelque faveur temporaire 
lui soit accordée. Mais serait-il possible aujourd’hui de revenir sur la question 
de Vhérédité, cette grande concession, déja rejetée par lui, du Traité d’Alliance ? 
Et comment les Quatre Puissances pourraient-elles concilier désormais cette 
concession avec le maintien de lintégrité de ’Empire Ottoman, qui forme le 
principal objet de leur sollicitude ? | 

La Sublime Porte vient de déclarer ses intentions formelles au sujet de 
Vhérédité, et elle a lieu d’espérer que les Quatre Puissances voudront bien se 
pénétrer de la vérité des raisons qui précédent, ainsi que de la justice qui milite 
en sa faveur, et achever l’ceuvre qu’elles ont entreprise et dont la Sublime 
Porte a déja recueilli les premiers fruits. 

Il est important de faire observer encore que si, d’un coté, les forces de terre 
et de mer du Pacha, a qui sera confié 4 l’avenir le gouvernement de lEgypte, 
doivent étre suffisantes pour la protection du commerce et le maintien de la 
tranquillité intérieure de la province, elles doivent aussi, de l’autre, pouvoir se 
concilier avec ses ressources locales, ainsi qu’avec la streté intérieure de |’Empire 
et les nouvelles institutions que Sa Majesté Impériale le Sultan y a introduites, 
et qui devront étre également appliquées 4 Egypte, aux termes méme du 
Traité de Londres,—institutions d’aprés lesquelles les mesures vexatoires exercées 
jusqu’ici envers les habitans de cette contrée doivent naturellement cesser. 
C’est pourquoi ce point aussi mérite un examen sérieux. _ 

Vous voudrez bien, M. l’Ambassadeur, porter le contenu de la présente 
dépéche a la connaissance de Messieurs les Membres de la Conférence. 


(Translation.) 
13 Chewal, 1256 (December 8, 1840.) 


ALL the world has been able to appreciate the good intentions and the 
moderation of which the Sublime Porte has given proof, towards Mehemet 
Ali, since the accession of our August Master to the throne, at the same time 
that it took means for defending the rights and interests of the Imperial 
throne. On the other hand, nobody can be ignorant of the exactions, of the 
excessive ambition of Mehemet Ali, and of his obstinacy in persisting, both 
under the reign of Sultan Mahmoud, and under the present reign, in inad- 
missible pretensions, and in the proceedings which have brought on the events 
which have recently taken place; it is therefore superfluous to enter here into 
any details upon this subject. 

But independently of his previous conduct, and even after the Treaty 
happily concluded between the Sublime Porte and the Four Powers, Mehe- 
met Ali has obstinately maintained his system of resistance, and far from 
having had recourse to the Sovereign clemency, he has only employed him- 
self in preparing for war, without at all taking into account the important 
favours which were secured to him by that Treaty, nor the absolute 
impossibility of modifying it, and shutting his eyes not only to the personal 
advantages which he would have derived from his acceptance and the evil 
consequences to which he exposed himself by a refusal, but also to the 
numerous successes which have crowned our operations in Syria, and to the 
dislike and discontent which have broken out against him on the part of the 
inhabitants of Egypt. 

The Sublime Porte, on the contrary, has scrupulously regulated all its 
actions in conformity with the stipulations of the Treaty, in proclaiming, 
after concerting with the Representatives of the Four Powers, the deprivation 
of Mehemet Ali, which was imposed upon it by the necessity of securing its 
present and future interests. 

Now, and after all that has just been stated, how could authority oe 
again confided to such a man as Mehemet Ali? However, and although the 


117 


Sultan has not an intention of granting any thing, of his own accord, to 
Mehemet Ali, nevertheless, in case of an application on the part of the 
Great Powers, it is possible that, out of deference to them, some temporary 
favour may be granted to him. But would it now be possible to return to 
the question of the hereditary succession, that great concession, already 
rejected by him, of the Treaty of Alliance? And how could the Four 
Powers henceforth reconcile that concession with the maintenance of the 
integrity of the Ottoman Empire, which forms the principal object of their 
solicitude ? 

The Sublime Porte has just declared its formal intentions on the subject 
of the hereditary succession, and it has reason to hope that the Four Powers 
will be impressed with the truth of the foregoing considerations, as well as 
with the justice which militates in its favour, and will finish the work which 
they have undertaken, and of which the Sublime Porte has already reaped 
the first fruits. 

It is important again to observe, that if, on the one hand, the land and 
sea forces of the Pasha, to whom the Government of Egypt shall be confided 
for the future, ought to be sufficient for the protection of the commerce and 
the preservation of the internal tranquillity of the Province, they ought also, 
on the other hand, to be proportioned to its local resources, as well as to 
the internal security of the Empire and the new institutions which His 
Imperial Majesty the Sultan has there introduced, and which must be equally 
applied to Egypt, according to the very terms of the Treaty of London,-— 
institutions according to which the vexatious measures hitherto practised to- 
wards the inhabitants of that country must naturally cease. This point, there- 
fore, also merits a serious examination. 

You will have the goodness, M. l’Ambassadeur, to communicate the 
contents of this despatch to the members of the Conference. 


Inclosure 3 in No. 104. 


Rechid Pasha to Viscount Ponsonby. 
Sublime Porte, le 8 Décembre, 1840. 


LA Sublime Porte vient de recevoir une communication de la Convention 
conclue 4 Alexandrie, le 27 Novembre dernier, entre le Commodore Napier et 
Boghos Bey, agissant au nom de Méhémet Ali. 

La Sublime Porte ne saurait voir dans cette Convention qu’un Acte déro- 
gatoire, et par le fond, et par la forme, aux droits imprescriptibles, et a la dignité 
de Sa Majesté Impériale le Sultan, et contraire méme a l’esprit et a la lettre de 
la Convention signée 4 Londres le 15 Juillet,—Convention qui implique l’accord 
et le concours de toutes les Puissances signataires pour la validité de toute 
démarche, mesure ou acte concernant son exécution. Or, la Convention conclue 
par le Commodore Napier, loin de porter ce caractére d’une décision unanime 
entre les dites Puissances, et préalablement arrétée par elles, ne peut et ne 
doit étre considérée que comme un incident isolé, et sans valeur. La Sublime 
Porte n’a d’ailleurs jamais regu aucune communication au sujet de Vintention ou 
auraient été les Quatre Puissances, d’apres cette méme Convention, de recom- 
mander 4 Sa Majesté Impériale le Sultan de réintégrer Mehémet Ali dans le 
Gouvernement de l’Egypte, et surtout de rendre ce gouvernement héréditaire 
dans sa famille. Elle se croit en outre fondée a penser qu’alors méme qu’une 
pareille recommandation aurait été adressée au Sultan, les Puissances ses Alliés 
n’auraient pas méconnu le droit de Sa Majesté Imperiale de se déterminer sur ce 
point d’aprés ses intéréts. 

En conséquence, la Sublime Porte déclare protester, comme elle proteste 
par la présente de la maniére la plus formelle, contre la Convention conclue le 
27 Novembre, par le Commodore Napier,—Convention qu’elle doit regarder et 
qu’elle regarde en effet comme nulle et non avenue. 

Et c’est aux fins de faire connaitre cette décision de la Sublime Porte que le 
Soussigné, Ministre des Affaires Etrangéres, a l’ordre d’adresser la présente note 
4 son Excellence M. l’Ambassadeur Extraordinaire et Ministre Plénipotentiaire 
de Sa Majesté Britannique. } 

Le Soussigné profite de cette occasion, pour renouveler 4 son Excellence 
’ idération. 
l’assurance de sa haute consideratio ‘Siend RECHID. 


118 


(Translation.) 
Sublime Porte, December 8, 1840. 


THE Sublime Porte has just received a communication of the Con- 
vention concluded at Alexandria, on the 27th of November last, between 
Commodore Napier and Boghos Bey, acting in the name of Mehemet Ali. 

The Sublime Porte can only see in this Convention an Act derogatory, 
both in spirit and in form, to the imprescriptible rights, and to the dignity of 
His Imperial Majesty the Sultan, and even contrary to the spirit and to the | 
letter of the Convention signed at London on the 15th of July,—a Convention 
which implies the agreement and concurrence of all the Powers who signed it 
for the validity of every step, measure, or act, relating to its execution. Now, 
the Convention concluded by Commodore Napier, far from bearing the cha- 
racter of an unanimous decision between the said Powers, and of one taken by 
them beforehand, can and ought only to be considered as an isolated incident, 
and of no value. The Sublime Porte, moreover, has never received any 
communication on the subject of the intention which the Four Powers had, 
according to this Convention, of recommending to His Imperial Majesty the 
Sultan to reinstate Mehemet Ali in the Government of Egypt, and above all, of 
making that Government hereditary in his family. It considers itself, besides, 
justified in supposing that if even such a recommendation had been addressed 
to the Sultan, the Powers, his Allies, would not have lost sight of the right 
of His Imperial Majesty to decide upon this point according to his interests. 

Consequently, the Sublime Porte declares that it protests, as it does pro- 
test by the present Note, in the most formal manner, against the Convention 
concluded, on the 27th of November, by Commodore Napier, a Convention 
which it must regard, and which it does regard in fact, as null and void. 

And it is for the purpose of making known this decision of the Sublime 
Porte, that the Undersigned, Minister for Foreign Affairs, is instructed to 
address the present Note to his Excellency the Ambassador Extraordinary 
and Minister Plenipotentiary of Her Britannic Majesty. 

The Undersigned avails himself of this opportunity to renew to his Ex- 
cellency the assurance of his high consideration. 

(Signed) RECHID. 


No. 105. 


Major-General Sir C. F. Smith to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received January 
5, 1841.) 


Head-Quarters—Army of Syria, 
My Lord, Beyrout, November 24, 1840. . 

I HAVE great satisfaction in acquainting your Lordship that a pru- 
dent adherence to my instructions from the Foreign Office has struck a 
heavier blow on the army of Ibrahim Pasha than a series of general 
actions could have achieved. Each succeeding victory could only have 
withdrawn us so much farther from our resources, without advancing, in 
any degree, the cause we have in hand. I take not merit to myself, un- 
less it be formy forbearance. For the number and the nature of the troops 
under my command, and the extended line of coast I have to guard, com- 
pelled me to be strictly on the defensive in the towns already in our pos- 
session, whilst a forward movement would have been unmilitary and 
unmeaning. 

Wearied in waiting for an opportunity of practising his well- 
disciplined cavalry and artillery upon a detachment of Turkish infantry ; 
Ibrahim, on the 21st instant, broke up from Zahle and Malaca in full 
retreat on Damascus, where he now is with 30,000 men, including 7,000 
cavalry and artillery. He has pushed a corps of 3,000 irregular cavalry 
to El Mezerib, on the road towards Mecca,—the only route now open to 
him for a final retreat into Egypt,—whither I calculate on his going the 
as he receives from Alexandria the political news brought by the 

riental, 


119 


In as ar as regards the sway of Mehemet Ali in Syria, I look upon 
the military part of the question as determined.’ __ 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) C. F. SMITH, 
Major-General, Commanding. 
P.S.—The Emir Effendi and: other chiefs who left Ibrahim near 
Damascus, report his force to exceed 50,000, of whom 40,000 are said to 
be effective. On a aS: 


No. 106. 


Major-General Sir C. F. Smith to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received 
January 5, 1841.) 


My Lord, Head-Quarters, Beyrout, November 29, 1840. 


_ THE information from Damascus, under date of the 26th instant, received 
this morning, is to the effect that the troops from Aleppo had commenced their 
retreat from the first named city towards El Mezerib. Ibrahim Pasha had 
ordered all his Secretaries to be in readiness to depart with him by the same 
route, and the whole of the force under his command had moved, or was in order 
of march. | . 

_ Thus I may be permitted to congratulate your Lordship on the termina- 
tion of the campaign in Syria. I have, &c., 
(Signed) Cz HOSTEL 
Major-General Commanding. 


No. 107. 


Major-General Sir C. F. Smith to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received 
February 10, 1841. 

(Extract.) Beyrout, December 6, 1840. 

I HAVE to announce to your Lordship that a courier from Alexandria has 
stopped the progress of the Egyptian Army in retreat,—and that Ibrahim 
Pasha, by intelligence of the 2d imstant from Damascus, had returned to the 
city with an intention of quartering his whole force within the walls, wisely 
preferring, to the hazard of a retreat through the Desert, the guarantee of the 
Convention for embarking all he possesses (plunder as well as military stores) at 
the points we hold upon the coast,—such stipulation having been made clear, to 
his understanding, as being binding on the Allies. The contrary, however, 
being the fact, lie will now find himself (accidentally as it were) master of a 


strong hold, in the heart of Syria, of which he had been virtually, if not totally, - 


bereaved. 


No. 108. 


Mr. Consul Larking to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewed January 1, 1841.) 


My Lord, Alexandria, December 6, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to acquaint your Lordship that on the 28th ultimo, 
Commodore Napier despatched the ‘‘ Medea” steam frigate to Admiral Sir 
Robert Stopford, with the intelligence of the Convention he had concluded 
with Mehemet Ali on the basis stated in my last despatch to your Lordship. 

On the same day, Commodore Napier, with the ships under his command, 
quitted the coast—in consequence, I presume, of the stormy state of the 


weather. , 
Since that period, no event of any importance has occurred, and Egypt is 


tranquil. : 
1 have the honour to inclose a translation of the circular letter of Mehemet 


Ali to the Authorities of Egypt, announcing the restoration of peace. 
I have, &c., 


(Signed ) JOHN W. LARKING. 
SE EE | 


120 
Inclosure in No. 108. 
Circular of Mehemet Ali to the Mudirs and Governors of Egypt. 
(Translation.) 


AS chance entirely rules the world, peaceable preparations sometimes ter- 
minate in war, and warlike preparations sometimes terminate in peace. From 
the Creation to the present time, such has been the case. The will of God is 
the great first cause, and the end of all things. God is all powerful. 

The stars were from the beginning unfavourable to my late efforts, until 
the Commodore of the Fleet of Her Britannic Majesty arrived, and announced 
that the Government of Egypt was to be hereditary in my family for the sake 
of peace. The European Powers have thus determined. Peace is the object of 
all Governments, and these things have happened to bring back repose, to stop 
the effusion of Mussulman blood, to satisfy the minds of the people, and allow 
all to return to their habitual pursuits of commerce or agriculture. 

With this view, the Commander-in-Chief of the forces in Syria has been 
ordered to retire from that country, and return to Egypt with all his camp, and 
the slaves of Egypt. 

A copy of this letter has been sent to ail Governors in Egypt, as well 
as to you. 


No. 109. 


Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston.— (Received January 5.) 


My Lord, Paris, January 1, 1841. 


I ACCIDENTALLY met M. Guizot this evening. He mentioned to me, 
that he had written three days ago a despatch to Baron Bourqueney, in which 
he had fully explained the feelings and sentiments of the French Government 
upon the actual state of affairs in the East. The question between the Sultan 
and Mehemet Ali, he said, had been concluded by the Four Powers without 
the interference of France, and if any points still remained to be settled respect- 
ing the future condition of the Pasha of Egypt, the French Government desired 
not to be a party to the settlement. The position of the Ottoman Empire rela- 
tive to the European Powers was however a different question; and one on 
which, though he was prepared to make no proposition, the French Government 
would be disposed to enter into consultation with the other Governments who 
were interested in maintaining its independence and neutrality. The security of 
the Christian population of Syria was alsoa subject well worthy the consideration 
of the European Powers, and the French Government would be ready, in concert 
with the other Allies of the Porte, to consider of the means best calculated to 
obtain that object. | have only time left, before the departure of the messenger 
to-night, to make this short and hasty report of M. Guizot’s conversation. 

. I have, &c., 
(Signed) GRANVILLE. 


No. 110. 


Viscount Ponsonly to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received January 5, 1841.) 


My Lord, Therapia, December 9, 1840. 
{| I HAVE the honour to inclose to your Lordship, copy of a note which I 
have received from his Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs, announcing 
that His Imperial Majesty the Sultan has given orders that the blockade of the 
ports and échelles of Syria should be raised. 
I also inclose copy of my letter to Her Majesty’s Consul-General on this 
subject. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed ) PONSONBY. 


renee 


121 
Inclosure 1 in No. 110. 


Rechid Pasha to Viscount Ponsonby. 


Monsieur |’Ambassadeur, , Sublime Porte, le2 Decembre, 1840. 
“".J’?AI Vhonneur de vous informer, qu’en conséquence de l’occupation 
définitive par les troupes Ottomanes du littoral de la Syrie, Sa Majesté le 
Sultan vient d’ordonner la levée du blocus des ports et échelles de ce littoral. 


Recevez, &c., 
(Signé) ‘“RECHID. 


(Translation. ) 
Monsieur |’Ambassadeur, Sublime Porte, December 2, 1840. 


. I HAVE the honour to inform you, that in consequence of the definitive 
occupation of the coast of Syria by the Ottoman troops, His Majesty the 
Sultan has ordered that the blockade of the ports and stations of that coast 
should be raised. 
Receive, &c., 
(Signed) RECHID. 


focloaase 2 in No. 110. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Mr. Cartwright. 


Sir, Therapia, December 5, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to request that you will make known to the British 
merchants, that I have received from his Excellency the Ottoman Minister for 
Foreign Affairs an official notification, under date the 2nd instant, stating, that 
in consequence of the definitive occupation of the coast of Syria by the troops 
of His Imperial Majesty the Sultan, the Sublime Porte has ordered the blockade 
of the ports and échelles of that coast to be raised. 

; I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No. 111. 


The Marquess of Clanricarde to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received January 6, 1841.) 


(Extract.) St. Petersburgh, December 22, 1840. 


I YESTERDAY visited Count Nesselrode, who read to me the heads of the 
arrangement which your Lordship desired should be adopted, and signed by the 
Four Powers, and by France, to which, he said, he had not the slightest 
objection. His Excellency further said, that France ought to sign it, in accord- 
ance with the Collective Note presented to the Sultan, and that he trusted 
she would demand no more. Count Nesselrode expressed great gratification at 
the sentiments he understands your Lordship to entertain upon the idea of a 
general guarantee of the integrity of Turkey; and he said that he hoped the 
honours that the Emperor had conferred upon the Archduke Frederick, Admiral 
Sir Robert Stopford, and Commodore Napier, would show how entirely absent 
from the mind of His Imperial Majesty was any feeling of jealousy at the 
success of the Allied arms without the assistance of a Russian force. 


yo.7 112. 


Count Nesselrode to Baron Brunnow.—( Communicated by Baron Brunnow, 
January 7, 1841.) 


(Extract.) St. Pétersbourg, le} Deécembre, 1840. 


JE me hate de répondre 4 l’expédition que votre Excellence m’a fait Phon- 
neur de m/’adresser en date du “N, et dont Varrivee ici avait ete 


presque immédiatement précédée par celle des rapports que vous aviez confiés au 
R 


122 


Marquis de Clanricarde. Avant de m’expliquer plus en détail sur le principal 
objet de cette expédition, mon premier besoin, M. le Baron, est de vous faire part 
de la vive satisfaction avec laquelle l’Empereur a accueilli !’heureuse nouvelle de 
la soumission de Méhémet Ali. Le Traité de Londres a enfin été exécuté en 
dépit de toute opposition. Il la été dans sa plus rigoureuse étendue, et cela 
sans qu’il en ait cotité aux Puissances signataires aucun compromis, aucune con- 
cession regrettables. Il n’est pas jusqu’aux démonstrations armées dont |’Es- 
cadre Britannique a accompagné sa sommation 4 Alexandrie, qui n’impriment a 
son résultat un caractére plus favorable encore 4 la considération de l’Alliance. 
Veuillez-bien, M. le Baron, offrir 4 Lord Palmerston nos félicitations sincéres 
de ce dénouement, que nous envisageons comme un commun triomphe de sa poli- 


tique et de la ndtre. 

La Question d’Orient ainsi réglée, reste maintenant a en consacrer et a 
en consolider la solution par une transaction finale 4 laquelle concourrait la 
France. “Vous avez déja été éventuellement mis au fait des vues et des inten- 
tions qu’entretient 4 ce sujet notre auguste Maitre. A plus forte raison, l’Em- 
pereur sera-t-il disposé 4 admettre le plan que vous a proposé Lord Palmerston, 
puisqu’il simplifie encore davantage l’Acte qu’il s’agit de conclure. Sa Majesté 
n’a donc pu qu’approuver le motif qui porte Lord Palmerston a désirer que les 
‘détails de l’arrangement spécial en vertu duquel le Sultan accordera 4 Méhémet 
Ali Vinvestiture de l’Egypte, ne soient point incorporés dans le texte méme de la 
transaction. D’aprés cela, M. le Baron, si les bases de la transaction projetée 
restent telles que le Principal Secrétaire d’Etat vous les a exposées, et si le Gou- 
vernement Francais se décide a l’accepter, l’Empereur vous autoriserait a y con- 


courir pour votre part. 


(Translation. ) 


(Extract.) St. Petersburgh, December $$, 1840. 
I HASTEN to reply to the despatch which your Excellency has done 


me the honour to address to me under date of the %}**., and the arrival of 
which was almost immediately preceded by that of the reports which you 
entrusted to the Marquis of Clanricarde. Before entering further into detail 
upon the principal subject of that despatch, my first desire, M. le Baron, is 
to communicate to you the lively satisfaction with which the Emperor received 
the happy intelligence of the submission of Mehemet Ali. The Treaty of 
London has at last been executed in spite of all opposition. It has been so 
to its fullest extent, and that without having cost the Powers who were 
Parties to it any compromise, or any concession to be regretted. There is 
nothing, even including the armed demonstration with which the British 
squadron accompanied its summons at Alexandria, which has not stamped 
its result with a character still more favourable to the consideration of the 
Alliance. Have the goodness, M. le Baron, to offer our sincere congratu- 
lations to Lord Palmerston upon this result, which we consider as a common 
triumph of his and of our policy. 

The Eastern Question thus settled, it now remains to record and confirm 
the solution thereof by a final transaction in which France should concur. 
You have already, in anticipation of this event, been put in possession of the 
views and intentions which our august Master entertains upon this subject. 
Much more will the Emperor be disposed to accede to the plan which Lord Pal- 
merston has proposed to you, because it simplifies still further the transaction 
which is to be concluded. His Majesty, then, could not but approve the 
motive which leads Lord Palmerston to desire that the details of the special 
arrangement, by virtue of which the Sultan shall grant to Mehemet Ali the 
investiture of Egypt, should not be embodied in the text of the agreement. 
Accordingly, M. le Baron, if the bases of the proposed agreement should be 
such as have been stated to you by the Principal Secretary of State, and if 
the French Government should decide upon accepting it, the Emperor would 
authorize you to concur in it. 


perenne 


123 


No. 113. 
Viscount Palmerston to Lord Clanricarde. 


(Extract.) | Foreign Office, January 11, 1841. 

I HAVE received your Excellency’s despatch of the 22nd of Decem- 
ber, reporting the language held by Count Nesselrode respecting the 
Turco-Egyptian Question, in an interview which you had with his Excel- 
lency on the preceding day; and I have to instruct your Excellency to 
assure the Russian Government that the honours which the Emperor 
has conferred upon the British naval officers employed in the recent 
operations in the Levant, have been the source of extreme gratification 
to Her Majesty’s Government, as affording a striking proof of the friendly 
feelings of the Emperor towards England, and as being a public mani- 
festation of the cordiality with which the Emperor has co-operated with 
Her Majesty in the execution of the Treaty of July. 

Your Excellency will also say, that Her Majesty’s Government 
appreciate very highly the sound judgment with which the Emperor has 
acted in the whole of these transactions; for there cannot be a doubt that 
the powerful naval and military force, which the Emperor has kept in 
reserve to be ready to act in case of need, has essentially contributed to 
the successful result which has been obtained; while the circumstance 
that those forces have been kept in reserve, and have not prematurely 
been brought into action, has prevented some political difficulties which 
might otherwise by possibility have arisen. 


No. 114. 
Sir John Barrow to Lord Leveson.—(Received January 15.) 


My Lord, Admiralty, January 11, 1841. 

I AM commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to 

send you herewith, for the information of Viscount Palmerston, copies of 

a letter from Admiral the Honourable Sir Robert Stopford, dated the Ist of 

December last, and its inclosures, relative to the Convention entered into 
with Mehemet Ali by Commodore Sir Charles Napier. 
I am, &c. 


(Siened) | JOHN BARROW. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 114. 
Admiral Stopford to R. More O’ Ferrall, Esq. 


“ Princess Charlotte,” St. George’s Bay, 
Sir, Beyrout, December 1, 1840. 


I BEG to transmit for their Lordships’ information the copy of a 
Convention, which Commodore Napier has entered into with Mehemet Ali, 
the correspondence leading thereto having been transmitted by him from 
Alexandria. 

I beg you will further acquaint their Lordships, that I do not feel 
myself authorized to enter into this Convention ; and the Egyptian troops 
being already on their retreat by the Mecca road to Egypt, I cannot 
consider this as a concession from Mehemet, but the consequence of their 
late discomfitures, and the inimical ate of he country towards them. 

ave, &c., 
(Signed) ROBERT STOPFORD. 
7 Admiral. 


aa 


R 2 


124 
Inclosure 2 in No. 114. 


[See Inclosure 2 in No. 90.] 


SBN PE DR TONS A 82 SPIE GALE Ke ASA DLS ERLE ER HG EMMIS 


No. 115. 
Sir John Barrow to Lord Leveson.—(Received January 16.) 


My Lord, Admiralty, January 16, 1841. 


I AM commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to 
transmit herewith, to be laid before Viscount Palmerston, copies of two 
letters from Admiral Sir Robert Stopford, dated at Marmorice the 14th of 
last month ; the first transmitting the report from Captain Fanshawe, who 
was sent to negotiate with Mehemet Ali, of his proceedings on that service, 
with a copy of the engagement entered into by the latter, and other 
papers; the second transmitting a copy of Commodore Napier’s reply to a 
letter from the Admiral upon the subject of the unauthorized Convention 
concluded by the Commodore. 

I have, &c., | 
(Signed) JOHN BARROW. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 115. 
Admiral Stopford to R. More O’ Ferrall Esq. 


“ Princess Charlotte,” 
Sir, Marmorice, December 14, 1840. 


WITH reference to my letter of the 10th instant, I beg you will 
be pleased to acquaint their Lordships, that Captain Fanshawe arrived 
here this morning in the “Megeera” from Alexandria, with the written 
engagement by Mehemet Ali, a translation of which I inclose herewith, as 
well as of that officer’s report to me of his proceedings on the service upon 
which he was ordered; and I have immediately despatched him in the 
“Stromboli,” to Constantinople, in the further fulfilment of Viscount 
Palmerston’s instructions. 

{ hope their Lordships will agree with me, that Captain Fanshawe 
has shown great judgment and firmness in his proceedings in this important 
negotiation. | 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) ROBERT STOPFORD, 
Admiral. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 115. 
Captain Fanshawe to Admiral Stopford. 


Her Majesty’s Steam Vessel “ Megera,’’ at Sea, 
Sir, December 12, 1840. 

I HAVE the honour to report to you my proceedings in the service 
on which you ordered me. 

I arrived off Alexandria in this vessel early on the morning of the 
8th, and finding no English man-of-war off the place, proceeded into the 
port, and sent for Mr. Larking, Her Majesty’s Consul, whom I requested to 
inform Mehemet Ali that I was charged by you to make a communication 
to him from Her Majesty’s Government, and for which purpose [ 
demanded an interview with him in the presence of Boghos Bey. 

__ At noon I went to the Palace with Mr. Larking, and had an audience 
with Mehemet Ali: after delivering your letter to him and passing a few 
compliments, I read to him my extract,* a copy of which I inclose, from 


* Inclosure 3 in No. 124, 


125 


Lord Palmerston’s instructions, which was interpreted to him by his 
Dragoman, and then presented to him, expressing my hope that his com- 
pliance with what it required, would restore a good understanding 
between the Sultan and himself. He alluded to the recent Convention, 
and said he had promised all this before to Commodore N apier, if Kgypt 
was guaranteed to him, and that he never departed from his word. 

I replied, 1 had no guarantee to offer; but he would perceive that, 
though you had not been able to ratify that Convention, you had lost no 
time in communicating the instructions received from your Government, 
and in expressing your own disposition to conciliate; and that I hoped he 
would merit the wish which I knew you had expressed, and take some 
immediate steps for the restitution of the Turkish fleet, which I regretted 
to observe was making no preparation for sea; that the words in my note 
with reference to the fleet were “immediate,” and “ without delay;’’ and 
I was sure his giving directions for that part of it which could be most 
expeditiously equipped proceeding to you at Marmorice, would be 
regarded in a favourable light, both at London and at Constantinople. 

Mehemet Ali said earnestly, he had always wished to give the fleet 
up to his master; that I might pledge myself that it should be ready to 
deliver to me, or to any Officer that might be sent by the Porte to take 
charge of it, and that he would send his own officers and men to assist in 
navigating it, if he was reinstated in Egypt; adding, if I give up the 
fleet, what security have I, having already given orders for the evacua- 
tion of all the places referred to ? 

I told him he must look for his security in the good faith and friendly 
disposition of the English Government, and in the influence it might have 
with the Sultan and the Allied Powers. He seemed rather disposed to 
yield on this point, but gave no positive answer. I then stated that my 
time was limited; he said he had no wish for delay. The documents 
which I had given him should be forthwith translated, and brought again 
under his consideration, and that I should have his answer in French to 
take to you as soon as possible. I[replied, I was authorized to take his final 
answer to Constantinople, and that I must be furnished with his written 
engagement to convey thither; and as I concluded it would be written in 
Turkish, I must have a translation of it also, that I might be satisfied it con- 
tained all that was required. This was immediately assented to, Mehemet 
Ali saying, he was always ready to make his submission to the Sultan, 
and that he would promise all that was asked, if he was allowed to remain 
quiet in Egypt. This ended the conference. 

In the evening, Mr. Larking and myself had an interview by appoint- 
ment with Boghos Bey, who said it was Mehemet Ali’s desire to meet the 
views of the Allied Powers, and that he was pleased with the English 
mediation, but that he considered that he had already the promise of 
the hereditary government of Egypt, and he was afraid there would be 
difficulties raised at Constantinople, and that there was one Power (Russia) 
not so well disposed to see such a termination to the Question. I told 
Boghos Bey, that he must be aware the Allied Powers could not regard 
Mehemet Ali since his deposition by the Sultan in the same light as before, 
and that he must make his submission; and that I was sure, if he would 
without delay send such part of the Turkish fleet as could be got ready 
to Marmorice, it must tend to conciliate all parties, and be a proof of the 
entire sincerity of his intentions. 

I then called his attention to the limit of my stay at Alexandria, and 
to the necessity that the written engagement I was to receive should be 
so worded that I could not hesitate to convey it. Boghos assured me 
he would use his influence to prevent any obstacle ; that he was to attend 
a Council with Mehemet Ali directly, at which the translated copies would 
be discussed and the answer decided upon, which he thought would be 
quite satisfactory. This Council, however, I learnt was not so harmonious 
as Boghos Bey expected, and nothing was then decided. On the following 
morning (Wednesday) Mr. Larking received a summons, and had an inter- 
view with Mehemet Ali and Boghos Bey, which was more favourable; 
and I was informed I might expect a translation of the engagement early 
on the following day, and that it would contain all that was asked; but 


126 


Mr. Larking did not find Mehemet Ali disposed to let any part of the fleet 
go first,—a point which I had requested him to urge again, saying, they all 
came, and should all go together. I did not, however, receive the trans- 
lations of the letters to the Vizier and yourself, which I now inclose, until 
ten o’clock yesterday morning, but then accompanied by a notice that 
Mehemet Ali was ready to receive me. On perusing the letter to the 
Vizier, it appeared to me to be so complete an engagement, In all 
points required, without any especial stipulation about Egypt, and that 
though the terms of submission might be somewhat equivocal, it came 
within the view of Lord Palmerston’s instructions, and that I could not 
hesitate to be the bearer of it. I therefore repaired to the Palace with 
Mr. Larking, and had, I consider, a satisfactory interview with Mehemet 
Ali. I pointed out to him that I did not feel that the expressions in his 
letter to the Vizier, relating to the fleet, came up to the promise which he 
had made me the other day, and that I saw no appearance yet of pre- 
paration, and that I or some one else might return very soon to claim the 
fulfilment of that pledge. Mehemet Ali said he had given orders already . 
on the subject, and repeated earnestly that the fleet should be ready to 
quit the port, as far as he was concerned, five days after the arrival of 
the officer to whom the Sultan wished it to be delivered. 

I then remarked that on the subject of Candia there might be some 
delay, as I understood the Pasha there had not submitted to the Sultan ; 
and as I thought it probable the Porte might be prepared to send troops 
immediately to take possession of that island, I proposed that I should be 
the bearer of a letter to the Pasha of Candia, directing him to yield it to 
the Turkish Authorities; to which Mehemet Ali immediately assented, and 
ordered one to be written. I hope these points, therefore, may be taken 
as an earnest of his sincerity, though I am quite of opinion, that unless 
the Sultan gives him the hereditary Pashalic of Egypt, he will be very 
much disposed to fight for it—or, at any rate, to give further trouble. 
This letter to the Pasha of Candia being ready, I received it with those 
to the Vizier and yourself (all which I herewith transmit), all under flying 
seals, from Mehemet Ali’s hands, and took my leave of him. Boghos 
Bey then requested to speak with me on one or two subjects, by Mehemet 
Ali’s desire, which were—Ist. His wish to be allowed to send some of his 
steam-vessels to Gaza or El-Arish to receive the sick, wounded, women 
and children of Ibrahim Pasha’s army who might be entering Egypt by 
that route, and who would be thus spared a painful and tedious march, 
saying that Commodore Napier’s Treaty embraced that subject. I 
replied, that though you had not been able to confirm the Commodore’s 
Convention, you would, | was sure, for the cause of humanity, be now 
ready to meet Mehemet Ali’s wish, and that | would communicate with 
the senior officer of our ships off the port on the subject, who would allow 
vessels, going strictly for that purpose, to pass freely. 2ndly. That in 
case of any of our ships of war coming to the port, the commanders should 
be desired to conform rigidly to the Quarantine regulations. I told him 
they always had, and always would do so, and reminded him of the 
Quarantine you had passed yourself in August, and said that whatever our 
Consul told the captains was required by the regulations of the port would 
be abided by; for Mr. Larking had an idea that they might contemplate 
some new regulations which might affect the ships or officers to be sent 
down for the Turkish fleet. 

At | p.m. yesterday we sailed from Alexandria, and off the port com- 
municated with Her Majesty’s ship “ Carysfort,” and I delivered to Captain 
Martin two letters (copies of which I inclose) which I had thought it 
right to address to the senior officer of Her Majesty’s ships off Alexandria 
and of which I hope you will approve; we are now proceeding to join your 
flag at Marmorice. 

I cannot close this report, without expressing how much I benefited 
by Mr. Larking’s ready and cordial assistance, and by the information I 
was able to obtain from him, and also from the zeal and attention of Mr. 
John Chumarian, the Dragoman. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) ARTHUR FANSHAWE, 


Captain. 


127 


P.S.—We left the “ Ambuscade,” small French frigate, a corvette, and 
team-vessel at Alexandria; the latter, I understand, was to start for 


France to-day ; the “ Bourgainville,” brig, sailed for Beyrout the day of 
our arrival. 


Inclosure 3 in No. 115. 


Free Translation of a Letter from Mehemet Ali to the Grand Vizier. 


[For a correct Translation of this letter, see Inclosure 1 in No. 113.] 


Inclosure 4 in No. 115. 
Translation of Mehemet Ali’s Letter to Mustapha Pasha of Candia. 


[For a correct Translation of this letter, see Inclosure 2 in No. 113.] 


Inclosure 5 in No. 115. 
Mehemet Ali to Sir Robert Stopford. 


[See Inclosure 2 in No. 116.] 


Inclosure 6 in No. 115. 
Admiral Stopford to R. More O’Ferrall, Esq. 


“* Princess Charlotte,”’ 
Sir, Marmorice, December 14, 1840. 
I TRANSMIT herewith Commodore Napier’s reply to my letter to 
him, disapproving of the unauthorized Convention he had made with 
Mehemet Ali, in explanation of his motives for so doing. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) ROBERT STOPFORD, 
Admiral. 


Inclosure 7 in No. 115. 
Commodore Napier to Admiral Stopford. 


Her Majesty’s ship “ Powerful,” 
Sir, Marmorice, December 14, 1840. 
1 HAVE to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 2nd of 
December, disapproving of the Convention I had entered into with the 
Egyptian Government for the evacuation of Syria and the surrender of the 
fleet. I have only to regret, that what I did with the best intentions, and 
believed to be in accordance with the views of the Allies, should not have 
met your approbation. 
I beg to assure you, that it was not from any want of respect to you 
that I did not communicate with you before signing it, but it was under 
the impression that it was of the utmost importance to seize the oppor- 


128 


tunity, when the Pasha was highly incensed against France, to bring him, 
without loss of time, to terms without the mediation of that Power. - 

I have also to acknowledge the receipt of the copy of a letter you have 
sent me from Lord Ponsonby, the original of which, I presume, is gone to 
Alexandria, and I beg to inclose you a copy of my reply. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER, 
Commodore. 


No. 116. 


Mr. Consul Larking to Viscount: Palmerston.—(Received January 8, 1841.) 


My Lord, Alexandria, December 22, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to acquaint your Lordship, that on the 8th instant, 
Captain Fanshawe, of Her Majesty’s ship “Princess Charlotte,” arrived 
here. 

He brought me a letter from Admiral Sir Robert Stopford, in which 
he requested me to assist Captain Fanshawe in obtaining the object 
of his mission by all the means in my power. 

By the same opportunity I learnt with no little surprise, that the 
arrangement so lately entered into by Commodore Napier, was totally un- 
authorised either by the Commander-in-chief, or Her Majesty’s Govern- 
ment, and that, consequently, the Convention signed by the Commodore 
was null and void. 

I regret exceedingly that under such circumstances I should have 
been instrumental in aiding Commodore Napier, but I trust your Lordship 
will overlook any irregularity on my part in having lent myself to forward 
his views, when I assure your Lordship that I did so, under the firm con- 
viction that the Commodore was duly authorised to treat with Mehemet 
Ali, and that it was my duty to assist him. 

At the desire of Captain Fanshawe, I waited on Mehemet Ali, an- 
nounced his arrival, explained the nature of his mission, and requested 
him to name an hour for receiving that officer. Mehemet Ali appeared 
surprised, and at first objected to conferences with Captain Fanshawe, 
stating that he had accepted the proposals of Commodore Napier in good 
faith, and in full reliance on his powers, seeing that he was at the head of 
a squadron which might be brought at any time to act against him; the 
Convention he had concluded with him being a sufficient proof of his sub- 
mission to the Sultan, and of his desire to meet the views of the Four 
Powers. He stated, however, that he should be happy to see Captain Fan- 
shawe, and named 12 o’clock on the same day for the interview, at which 
hour that officer waited on him accompanied by myself. 

Captain Fanshawe then read his Instructions, with extracts of a 
despatch from your Lordship to the Lords Commissioners of the Adiniralty, 
(copies of which he furnished to Boghos Bey,) and laid great stress on the 
immediate and unconditional restitution of the Ottoman Fleet, or even of 
some ships, as an earnest of his submission to his Sovereign the Sultan. 

To this Mehemet Ali answered in general terms, and stated that he 
had always intended to restore the fleet, but that he should cause the 
documents immediately to be translated, and having taken the subject into 
consideration, would give his answer on the following evening. 

On the same day Mehemet Ali called a council, and having described 
the nature of Captain Fanshawe’s mission, he expressed great unwilling- 
ness to re-open negotiations which he considered closed, and in this feeling 
he was warmly supported by Artin Bey. 

On the following day I saw Boghos Bey, and urged him to use his influ 
ence with Mehemet Ali to wave all tenacious adherence to the Convention 
of Commodore Napier, and make such immediate concession as would 
strengthen those claims on the moderation of the Sultan, which he con- 
sidered he had acquired by his assent to the proposals of that officer. 
Boghos Bey in reply stated, that he lay under great difficulty in this 


ee 


129 


respect, as he had to contend with the unfavourable predisposition with 
which Mehemet Ali was imbued, in finding the arrangement he had made 
with Commodore Napier so soon nullified ; but that nevertheless he would 
do his best to induce him to accede to the conditions of Captain Fanshawe ; 
and concluded by engaging me to accompany him on the following day to 


“Mehemet Ali, which | accordingly did. 


Mehemet Ali, at this second interview, repeated the expression of his 
surprise that an engagement just concluded should be considered invalid, 
and that he saw no termination to a negotiation which every day led to 
fresh demands. I replied that no one could more deeply regret than I did, 
having been a party in advising him to accept the conditions offered by 
Commodore Napier, for which, as it appeared in the sequel, he did not 
possess adequate authority; but that he must beaware that the recommen- 
dation of Her Majesty’s Government was in spirit nearly resembling that 
which led to the arrangement that had been entered into with Commodore 
Napier, and merely engaged him promptly to execute those measures which 
he had repeatedly declared it was his intention to adopt. To this Mehe- 
met Ali replied, that the present recommendation was different, inasmuch 
as that by the former arrangement his position was secured, whereas by 
this he was entirely at the mercy of the Sultan. 

I then said that for the Four Powers to guarantee him the Pashalic 
of Egypt, would be an act inconsistent with that independence of Turkey 
which it was the main object of the Alliance to secure; but that he might 
rest assured that any recommendation founded on his prompt and uncon- 
ditional compliance with the wishes of the Four Powers, would un- 
questionably have its due effect with the Sublime Porte, and infallibly lead 
to that formal guarantee for which he appeared so solicitous. 

Mehemet Ali then said that with regard to Captain Fanshawe’s pro- 
posal that he should deliver up a portion of the fleet, that would be a half 
measure, and might be construed into a desire to procrastinate that un- 
conditional surrender of the fleet which would take place as soon as he 
received an order from the Sultan stating to whom he was to deliver it 
over. That he submitted himself to the will of the Sultan, and threw 
himself on his generosity. As regarded the evacuation of Syria, it had 
already taken place, and as regarded Candia and the Holy Cities, he was 


prepared to address a letter to the Grand Vizier, in accordance with what 


was required of him. 

I reported this to Captain Fanshawe, who said that this answer was 
not in the form he expected, or according to the letter of his instruc- 
tions; that he would however be satisfied, and be the bearer of a letter to 
the Vizier if conformable to the above declaration. 

This letter, as well as one to Admiral Sir Robert Stopford, of both 
of which I. have the honour to inclose translations, were prepared and 


‘delivered to Captain Fanshawe, along with an order to the Commander of 


the Egyptian troops in Candia, immediately to effect the evacuation of 
that Island. 
Captain Fanshawe took his departure from hence for Marmorice, on 
the 12th instant, in Her Majesty’s steam-vessel “ Megeera.” 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) JOHN W. LARKING, 


Inclosure 3 in No. 116. 
(See Inclosure 1 in No. 126.] 


rt trt—“‘SSC 


130 


Inclosure 2 in No. 116. 
Mehemet Ali to Sir Robert Stopford. 


(Traduction.) 
Trés-honorable Amiral Sir Robert Stopford, 


J’AI recu les deux lettres que vous m’avez adressées, la premiére 
par ’entremise de Hamid Bey, qui avait été chargé d’une dépéche pour 
mon fils Ibrahim Pacha, et la seconde par le Commandant Fanshawe, 
Capitaine de votre Vaisseau Amiral. Je suis charmé de l’amitié que vous 
me témoignez, et m’empresse d’agir dans le sens que vous m/indiquez 
dans votre dépéche officielle. J’adresse en conséquence un placet sous ca- 
chet volant 4 la Sublime Porte, et pour que le contenu vous en soit connu 
jy joins la traduction en Francais. J’espére que ma condescendance sera 
appréciée par les Puissances Alliées, et en vous demandant la continuation 
de votre amiti¢, je me flatte que vos bons offices m’assureront leur bien- 
veillance. 


(Signé) MEHEMET ALI. 


(Translation.) 


Most Honourable Admiral Sir Robert Stopford, 


I HAVE received the two letters which you addressed to me, the first 
by the channel of Hamid Bey, who had been entrusted with a despatch 
for my son Ibrahim Pasha, and the second by Captain Fanshawe, of your 
flag-ship. I am delighted with the friendship which you evince towards 
me, and I hasten to act in the sense which you point out in your official 
despatch. I consequently address a petition to the Sublime Porte under 
flying seal, and in order that the contents thereof may be known to you, 
I add a French translation toit. I hope that my compliance will be appre- 
ciated by the Allied Powers, and in asking a continuance of your friend- 
ship, I flatter myself that your good offices will ensure me their good- 
will. 


(Signed) MEHEMET ALI. 


No. 117. 
Mr. Consul Larking to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received January 8, 1841.) 


My Lord, Alexandria, December 22, 1840. 

HAVING received intelligence that partial disorders had broken out 
in Mount Lebanon, which were attributed to the presence of Ibrahim 
Pasha at Damascus, I informed Boghos Bey of the fact, which led to Me- 
hemet Ali addressing a letter to Sir Robert Stopford on the subject. 

A letter which I wrote to Sir Robert Stopford, of which I have the 
honour to inclose a copy, will acquaint your Lordship with all that 
passed. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) JOHN W. LARKING. 


Inclosure in No. 117. 
Mr. Consul Larking to Sir Robert Stopford. 


Sir, Alexandria, December 21, 1840. 
BY Her Majesty’s steam-vessel “Hydra,” which arrived here 

17th instant, I learnt that Ibrahim Pasha had not evacuated Seine a 

that on the 7th December the Egyptian troops were still at Damascus 

although it was supposed they were on the point of leaving that city. ¢ 


131 


As this state of affairs is totally at variance with the information 
your Excellency had given to Mehemet Ali, and in contradiction to the 
declaration he had lately made to the Vizier, that Syria was already eva- 
cuated; I lost no time in calling the attention of Boghos Bey to the fact 
urging him to use his influence with Mehemet Ali, to induce him to for- 
ward to your Excellency an order to Ibrahim Pasha for the immediate 
and unconditional evacuation. I pointed out to him the certainty of a 
stop being put to negotiations at Constantinople, so soon as the news 
arrived that [brahim Pasha was still at Damascus, after his father’s 
formal declaration to the contrary, and that if any collision should unfor- 
tunately take place between the Turkish and Egyptian forces, it might 
be attributed to a desire on the part of Ibrahim Pasha still to avail him- 
self of the chances of war, and that such a supposition, although it might 
be erroneous, must prove most disadvantageous to the interests of 
Mehemet Ali. 

Boghos Bey assured me that no such views were entertained by Me- 
hemet Ali after the solemn declaration he had made, but that I was aware 
that for a considerable time Mehemet Ali had had no communication with 
his son, and that the only intelligence he had had of the movements of 
his army, was contained in a letter from your Excellency by which he 
was led to suppose that the evacuation was not only commenced, but com- 
pleted. I replied that this assurance must have been given in the full 
persuasion of its correctness, but I remarked, that so soon as your Excel- 
lency would hear that it had not taken place, you would be the first to 
demand an order for the immediate and unconditional evacuation of Syria, 
and this order being promptly and spontaneously given, would be inter- 
preted into a desire on the part of Mehemet Ali to remove all difficulties 
on the subject. { made use of other arguments, all of which Boghos Bey 
requested me to put in writing, in order that he might submit the same 
for the consideration of Mehemet Ali. 

I did this, and on the following day received a communication from 
Boghos Bey, to the effect that Mehemet Ali was entirely ignorant of the 
movements of Ibrahim Pasha, and felt convinced that the intelligence I 
received was not altogether correct; that should your Excellency deem it 
expedient, he could have no hesitation in giving the order, but that in the 
mean time he proposed sending an officer to Beyrout, who should be 
allowed to proceed to Damascus, being the bearer of a copy of his letter 
to the Vizier, and make known to [brahim Pasha his intentions regarding 
the evacuation of Syria, and at the same time make arrangements for the 
transport by sea of the sick, wounded, and women, whom it would be 
impossible to remove by the overland route. 

I remarked that such a proceeding would be totally irregular, as the 
commanding officer at Beyrout would never allow the passage of his 
Envoy, unless authorised by the Commander-in-chief, and that whatever 
communication he thought proper to make, must be made through your 
Excellency, and again urged him to wave all pretexts which might be 
interpreted into a desire to procrastinate, and at once to give the order in 
question. 

On the same evening I had another communication from Boghos Bey, 
in which he said that Mehemet Ali based his declaration on the statement 
made by your Excellency, and which statement had never been officially 
contradicted, but that the moment he heard from your Excellency that 
Ibrahim Pasha was still in Syria, he would not hesitate to furnish you 
with an order for the immediate and unconditional departure of the Egyp- 
tian troops from Syria. 

Foreseeing that further discussion would be unprofitable and produc- 
tive of loss of time, I requested that a letter might be addressed to your 
Excellency, containing the intentions of Mehemet Ali, which I have now 
‘the honour to inclose. ' 

I request that after perusal of this letter, your Excellency will favour 
me with your instructions how to proceed, and I have no hesitation in 
saying, that as soon as they are made known, I shall have no difficulty in 
carrying them into effect. mele 

You will perceive, that till an official contradiction arrives of the 

S 2 


132 


intelligence above alluded to, Mehemet Ali has a plea for refusing to take 
any further steps, the non-necessity of which had been pointed out to him 
by your Excellency. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) JOHN W. LARKING. 


Sub-inclosure in No. 117. 


Boghos Joussouf to Sir Robert Stopford. 


Monsieur |’ Amiral, Alexandrie, le 21 Décembre, 1840. 


VOTRE Excellence a pu se convaincre, a la lecture de la lettre 
adressée par le Vice-Roi mon maitre 4 Son Altesse le Grand Vizir, que 
nous avions été indirectement informés par une lettre, voie de terre, et 
datée des derniers jours de Ramazan, que Son Altesse Ibrahim Pacha se 
proposait d’opérer sa retraite de Damas, le 3 ou le 4 de Chewal, présent 
mois, pour rentrer en Egypte avec toute son armée. Cette nouvelle s’est 
d’ailleurs trouvée confirmée par les renseignemens parvenus a4 votre Ex- 
cellence, et en conséquence desquelles vous avez jugé a propos, M. 
V’Amiral, de renvoyer 4 Alexandrie Hamid Bey, qui, conformement aux 
clauses de la Convention conclue avec le Commodore Napier, avait été 
expédié a votre Excellence avec des dépéches pour Son Altesse Ibrahim 
Pacha. Mr. Larking m’ayant toutefois fait connaitre que d’aprés les 
informations qui lui avaient été transmises par le bateau 4 vapeur, sur le- 
quel M. le Général Smith est arrivé 4 Alexandrie, on pouvait attribuer 
état de rebellion qui ne cesse de se manifester dans certaines parties du 
Liban, contre l’autorité de la Sublime Porte, au séjour prolongé du Géné- 
ral-en-Chef Egyptien 4 Damas, et m’ayant exprimé l’opinion qu’il serait 
convenable d’expédier itérativement 4 Son Altesse Ibrahim Pacha lordre 
d’évacuer la Syrie, je me suis empressé de soumettre cet avis au Vice-Roi. 
Son Altesse ayant bien voulu le prendre en considération, m’a ordonné de 
porter a la connaissance de votre Excellence que les communications par 
terre avec la Syrie sont complétement interrompues, par suite de l’état de 
trouble et d’anarchie dans lequel est pour le moment plongée cette pro- 
vince, et qu’il lui parait impossible par cette voie de tenir Son Altesse 
Ibrahim Pacha au courant du résultat des derniéres négociations. Son 
Altesse rappelle en outre a votre Excellence, que le retour de Hamid 
Bey, qui avait éte précédemment chargé de transmettre ses ordres au 
Général-en-Chef, ne lui a pas laissé la ressource d’une autre voie de com- 
munication. En présence de ces difficultés, le Vice-Roi désire que dans 
le cas ot les appréhensions de Mr. Larking seraient fondées, et dans le cas 
aussi ot il resterait 4 votre Excellence un moyen quelconque de commu- 
niquer avec le Quartier-Général Egyptien, vous veuillez bien, M. l’Amiral, 
envoyer 4 Alexandrie un bateau 4 vapeur, pour porter de nouveau en 
Syrie Hamid Bey, ainsi que Vofficier Anglais chargé par votre Excellence 
de le seconder dans sa mission auprés d’I brahim Pacha. 

Votre Excellence se trouvant en position de prendre une idée juste de 
état actuel des choses en Syrie, je la prie de me faire ’honneur de me 
transmettre, le plus tét possible, son opinion sur ce point important, afin 
que nous puissions promptement y conformer nos démarches ultérieures. 

Je saisis, &c., 
(Signe) BOGHOS JOUSSOUF. 
* 


(Translation.) 


Monsieur |’ Amiral, : Alewandria, December 21, 1840. 


YOUR Excellency has been enabled to convince yourself, by reading 
the letter addressed by the Viceroy, my master, to his Highness the 
Grand Vizier, that we had been informed indirectly by a letter received 
overland and dated the last days of the Ramazan, that his Highness 
{brahim Pasha proposed to effect his retreat from Damascus on the 3rd 


or 4th Chewal, the present month, to return into Egypt with all his army. 
This news is moreover confirmed by the intelligence which has reached 
your Excellency, and in consequence of which you have thought fit, M. 
PAmiral, to send back to Alexandria Hamid Bey, who, agreeably to the 
terms of the Convention concluded with Commodore Napier, had been 
sent to your Excellency with despatches for his Highness Ibrahim Pasha. 
Mr. Larking having however informed me, that, according to the intelli- 
gence which had been sent to him by the steam-boat in which General 
Smith came to Alexandria, the state of rebellion against the authority of 
the Sublime Porte in certain parts of the Lebanon may be attributed to 
the prolonged stay of the Egyptian Commander-in-Chief at Damascus, 
and having expressed to me an opinion, that it would be expedient again 
to send to his Highness Ibrahim Pasha the orders to evacuate Syria, I 
hastened to submit this opinion to the Viceroy. His Highness having 
been pleased to take it into consideration, has ordered me to acquaint 
your Excellency, that the communication by land with Syria is entirely 
interrupted in consequence of the state of trouble and anarchy in which 
that province at present is plunged, and that it appears to him impossible 
to apprize his Highness Ibrahim Pasha of the result of the last negotiations 
by that route. His Highness, moreover, recalls to your Excellency’s 
attention, that the return of Hamid Bey, who had previously been directed 
to convey his orders to the Commander-in-Chief, has not left him the 
resource of another means of communication. In the midst of these 
difficulties, in the event of Mr. Larking’s apprehensions being well- 
founded, and in case your Excellency should have any means of communi- 
cating with the Egyptian head-quarters, the Viceroy requests that you 
will have the goodness, M. l’Amiral, to send a steamer to Alexandria, to 
convey Hamid Bey again to Syria, together with the English officer who 
may be directed by your Excellency to assist him in his mission to Ibrahim 
Pasha. ; 

Your Excellency being enabled by your position to form a just idea 
of the present state of affairs in Syria, | beg you to do me the honour to 
furnish me with your opinion on this important point as soon as possible, 
in order that we may promptly take further measures in conformity 
therewith. 

I avail myself, &c., 
(Signed) BOGHOS JOUSSOUF. 


No. 118. 
Mr. Consul Larking to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewed January 8, 1841.) 


My Lord, Alexandria, December 23, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to acquaint your Lordship that I have just been 
informed that M. Cochelet has received despatches from Count Ratti- 
Menton, French Consul at Damascus, stating that Ibrahim and Solyman 
Pashas have concentrated their troops at Damascus, amounting in all to 
40,000 men, with 20,000 camp followers, and that with this force they 
could defy the efforts of the Allies to expel them from Syria. 

I have no means of knowing whether or not this statement is founded 
on truth, but I have considered it important that your Lordship should 
be made acquainted with the circumstance. 

I have &c., 
(Signed) JOHN W. LARKING. 


een NS TS ES 


134 


No. 119. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received January 14, 1841.) 


My Lord, Therapia, December 15, 1840. 


RECHID PASHA has informed me, that the Sultan has read your 
Lordship’s despatch to Earl Granville of the 2nd of November*, and that 
His Majesty has expressed the great pleasure it gave him, as a vindication 
of his Sovereign right. 

I have, & 


C., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No. 120. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received January 14, 1841.) 


My Lord, Therapia, December 16, 1840. 


THE “Stromboli” has this moment arrived from Alexandria, and 
Captain Fanshawe, the officer employed by the Admiral Sir Robert 
Stopford, has brought a letter from Mehemet Ali to be delivered to the 
Grand Vizier, of which I inclose a translation given to me by Captain 
Fanshawef. ; 

I have sent notice of the arrival of Captain Fanshawe to the Minister 
for Foreign Affairs, and requested that he may be admitted to the Grand 
Vizier to deliver the letter from Mehemet Ali. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No. 121. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received January 14, 1841.) 


My Lord, Therapia, December 15, 1840. 


ON the 12th, his Excellency Rechid Pasha informed me that he had 
had a conversation with M. Cor, the French Dragoman, to the following 
effect :— 

M. Cor, speaking to the Pasha of the note sent by the Sublime 
Porte to the Four Representatives upon the subject of Commodore 
Napier’s Convention, said, that the Porte was in the right to protest 
against the form of that Act, but not against its substance; that the Act 
was generally approved of, particularly because it seemed likely to bring 
about a nearer connection between France and the Powers parties to the 
_ the Convention of the 15th of July; that the Porte might yet repent of 

acting as it did towards France, her most ancient ally; that the self-love 
of France was engaged in the question, and that means must be found, 
or some engagement made, in which France could take part. 

The Pasha replied, that as the Sublime Porte found the form of the 
Convention as bad as the substance was contrary to the interests of His 
Highness the Sultan, it was the duty of the Porte to act as it had done ;— 
“You say,” continued the Pasha, “that it is necessary to make an 
engagement of which France may be an integral part; we have only two 
propositions to make, and both are diametrically opposed to the policy 
adopted by France; namely, either the total and absolute submission of 
Mehemet Ali as a subject, and not as a vassal, or, his annihilation. How 
is it that you pretend to have at heart the integrity and the independence of 
the Ottoman Empire, when you seek to partition it? if you are so anxious 
for the preservation of Mehemet Ali, you have only to appoint him 
Governor of one of your provinces.” 


See Part II., p. 338. + For correct translation, see Inclosure 1 in No. 126. 


135 


“However,” said M. Cor, “ Egypt and some other provinces might 
well be given to Mehemet Ali, without making a partition of the empire.” 
The Pasha replied, “ Mehemet Ali is a rebel subject, and consequently his 
Sovereign is bound to treat him as such; but if he should submit as a 
simple subject, perhaps, in that case, he might be treated with generosity ; 
but, at any rate, so long as Mehemet Ali exists, so long the friendship 
of France will be divided between the subject and the Sovereign; and as 
we are anxious that friendship should be exclusively for us, Mehemet Ali 
must be annihilated.” 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


ER re em OME WE. ay 
No. 122. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received Ji anuary 14, 1841.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, December 16, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to inclose copy of a letter I received this day 
from Commodore Napier, and my reply to it. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 122. 


Commodore Napier to Viscount Ponsonby. 


Her Majesty’s Ship ‘“‘ Powerful,’’ 
(Extract.) Marmorice Bay, December 14, 1840. 

THE Commander-in-Chief has sent me a copy of a letter addressed 
to me by your Lordship, the original of which, I presume, has been sent 
to Alexandria; this letter states that the Porte had made a formal protest 
against my acts, and that the Convention is null and void, in which your 
Lordship and your Colleagues entirely concur, and you call upon me to 
abstain from carrying it into execution. 

In reply to which, I beg leave to acquaint your Lordship that I never 
had the least idea that the Convention could be carried into execution 
without the authority of the Porte and the Commander-in-Chief, to whom 
the whole correspondence was addressed; therefore I cannot see the 
necessity of the formal protest of the Porte against my acts. 

The Convention simply tied down Mehemet Ali to abandon Syria 
immediately, and give up the Turkish fleet, when the Porte acknowledged 
his hereditary title to govern Egypt; and on these conditions, I agreed to. 
suspend hostilities. | 

I was led to believe, from Lord Palmerston’s letter to your Lordship, 
that I had followed up the views of the Allied Powers. 1 was led to 
believe, by letters I have received from different members of the Govern-- 
ment, that they were most anxious to settle the Eastern Question speedily.. 

I further know that the French Consul-General and other French 
Agents at Alexandria were doing all they could to prevent Mehemet Ali 
from submitting, still holding out hopes of assistance from France. 

Under all these circumstances, I thought I was serving my country 
and the cause of the Sultan, in tying down Mehemet Ali to immediately 
evacuate Syria, and give up the Turkish fleet when acknowledged; and I 
knew perfectly well that Convention did not tie down the Sultan; and I 
firmly believe that if Thiers’ Ministry had not fallen, all I have done 
would have been approved, and I think it still will be approved. 

I have sent a copy of this to Admiral Sir Robert Stopford, and I trust 
your Lordship will send a copy to Her Majesty’s Secretary of State for 
Foreign Affairs. 


136 


Inclosure 2 in No. 122. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Commodore Napier. 


(Extract.) 7 Therapia, December 16, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter, dated 
December the 14th. I have inclosed it for Her Majesty’s Government. 


No. 123. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received January 16, 1841.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, December 18, 1840. 

I ENQUIRED of Admiral Walker how soon it would be possible for 
the Ottoman fleet to be delivered up tothe Sultan. He said, that with the 
aid of British ships and men, it might be prepared, and conducted to 
Candia, in the course of three weeks or so, but that it could not be risked 
in the Archipelago. 


No. 124. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.— (Received January 16, 1841.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, December 22, 1840. 


IN my despatch of the 16th instant, I reported the arrival of Captain 
Fanshawe, and the request I made to the Grand Vizier to allow the Captain 
to present Mehemet Ali’s letter to His Highness. [have now to acquaint your 
Lordship that the interview took place on the 18th instant, when Captain 
Fanshawe, accompanied by Captains Williams and Codrington, waited on 
the Vizier, and gave him the letter, and Captain Fanshawe made obser- 
vations in corroboration of the statements it contained, which your Lord- 
ship will find, as well as the reply made by the Grand Vizier, in the 
inclosed paper. 

‘ Ihave the honour to inclose a copy of a letter from Captain Fan- 
shawe. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 124. 
M. Pisani to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Péra, le 18 Décembre, 1840. 

VOICI ce qui s’est passé 4 ’entrevue du Capitaine Fanshawe avec le 
Grand Vizir. Le Capitaine était accompagné du Capitaine Codrington 
et du Capitaine du “Stromboli.” Le Capitaine a dit au Grand Vizir par 
l’entremise de son propre Drogman, qui est le Drogman du Consul! d’Angle- 
terre 4 Smyrne, qu'il a été chargé par l’Amiral de porter 4 Alexandrie une 
intimation a Méhémet Ali de faire sa soumission, en consentant a tous-les 
points qu’on portait a sa connaissance,—-points sur lesquels le Gouvernement 
Anglais est parfaitement d’accord avec ses Alliés; que sa commission con- 
sistait 4 prendre la réponse de Méhémet Ali dans une lettre ouverte. et de 
remettre lui-méme la lettre de Méhémet Ali entre les mains de Son Kifbsce 
le Grand Vizir, et en disant cela, il a remis au Grand Vizir la lettre de 
Menemet ae et une lettre de Moustapha Pacha de Candie, qui contint sa 

Le Grand Vizir a dit, aprés avoir lu la lettre de Méhémet Ali: 
“La Porte a déja une connaissance de ces conditions, comme on sait: 
mais je ne saurais vous rien dire sur cette grande question, que la Sub- 
time Porte traite avec les Cours Alliées, et qui, par conséquent, est devenu 


137 


une affaire de politique extérieure, tout-a-fait du ressort du Département 
des Affaires Extérieures, qui connait toutes les circonstances y relatives 
beaucoup mieux que moi. La Porte considérera sur cette question avec 
les Représentans des Cours Alliées, et son Excellence le Ministre des 
Affaires Etrangéres fera connaitre aux Alliés les intentions de la Porte ; 
je vous prie, en attendant, M.-le Capitaine, de ne pas prendre Vaccep- 
tation de cette lettre 4 vos mains, comme une acceptation de son con- 
tenu.” Le Capitaine a dit qu’il n’était non plus nullement autorisé 4 
entrer dans les détails de cette affaire, et qu’il prendra des mains de 
Lord Ponsonby le résultat de cette affaire. Le Capitaine a dit que 
Méhémet Ali luia donné sa parole qu’il remettra la flotte Turque a tel 
officier que la Porte chargera de la conduire ici. Le Vizir a répondu, 
“La flotte est 4 nous; Alexandrie est notre pays. Nous sommes sirs 
@avoir la flotte t6t ou tard immanquablement.” Le Capitaine a saisi A 
propos pour parler de pacification entre le Sultan et Méhémet Ali; le Grand 
Vizir a répondu, “ La pacification se fait entre deux Gouvernemens, et 
non pas entre un Souverain et un de ses sujets rebelles.” 
J’ai rendu compte a Réchid Pacha de ce qui s’est: passé. 


(Signé) F. PISANI. 


(Translation.) 


M. Pisani to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Pera, December 18, 1840. 


THE following is what took place at the interview between Captain 
Fanshawe and the Grand Vizier. The Captain was accompanied by 
Captain Codrington and the Captain of the “Stromboli.” The Captain 
said to the Grand Vizier, through his own Dragoman, who is the Drago- 
man of the English Consul at Smyrna, that he had been ordered by the 
Admiral to convey to Alexandria a summons to Mehemet Ali to make his 
submission, by consenting to all the points which were brought to his know- 
ledge—points which the English Government was perfectly agreed upon 
with its Allies; that his commission was to receive the reply of Mehemet 
Ali in an open letter, and to deliver himself Mehemet Ali’s letter into the 
hands of his Highness the Grand Vizier; and in saying this, he delivered 
to the Grand Vizier the letter from Mehemet Ali, and a letter from 
Mustapha Pasha of Candia containing his submission. , 

The Grand Vizier said, after having read Mehemet Ali’s letter: 
“The Porte is already aware of these conditions, as is known; but I 
can tell you nothing upon this great Question which the Sublime Porte 
is treating with the Allied Courts, and which consequently has become 
a question of foreign policy, belonging entirely to the Department 
for Foreign Affairs, which is acquainted with all the circumstances 
relating to it better than I am. The Porte will take this question 
into consideration with the Representatives of the Allied Courts, and 
his Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs will make known the 
intentions of the Porte to the Allies; I beg you, M. le Capitaine, in the 
mean time, not to consider my acceptance of this letter from you as an 
acceptance of its contents.” Captain Fanshawe said that he also was in 
nowise authorized to enter into the details of this affair, and that he 
would learn the result from Lord Ponsonby. The Captain said that 
Mehemet Ali had given him his word that he would deliver over the 
Turkish fleet to whatever officer the Porte shall direct to conduct it hither. 
The Vizier replied, ‘The fleet is ours; Alexandria is our country; we are 
perfectly sure of having the fleet sooner or later.” The Captain took the 
opportunity of speaking of peace between the Sultan and Mehemet Ali. 
The Grand Vizier replied, ‘‘ Peace is made between two Governments, and 
not between a Sovereign and one of his rebel subjects.” 

I have made a report to Rechid Pasha of what took place. 

Accept, &c., 
(Signed) F. PISANI. 


Searereenens er 
ah 


Inclosure 2 in No. 124. 


Captain Fanshawe to Viscount Ponsonby. 


Her Majesty’s steam vessel “ Stromboli,” 
My Lord, Therapia, December 17, 1840. 


WITH reference to my interview with your Lordship yesterday, | 
have now the honour to inclose to you a copy of the Note which I gave to 
Mehemet Ali on the 8th instant, after having communicated to him the 
contents verbally, and which your Lordship will perceive is strictly in 
conformity with the instructions from Lord Palmerston, which I received 
from Admiral Sir Robert Stopford, on being directed by him to proceed to 
Alexandria for the purpose. 

On the third day after my arrival at Alexandria, I received from 
Boghos.Bey the translation, which I presented to your Lordship yesterday, 
of the letter, or written engagement, from Mehemet Ali to the Vizier, the 
original of which I am the bearer of, and which I subsequently received 
from Mehemet Ali himself. 

I beg leave also to take this opportunity of reporting to your Lordship, 
that in both the interviews I had with Mehemet Ali, he expressed himself 
desirous of yielding entirely to the Sultan’s commands, in the hope that the 
intervention of the Allied Powers, and the mediation of England, with 
which he seemed much pleased, would obtain for him the tenure of Egypt, 
he laid stress upon holding the guarantee set forth in the Convention 
recently made with him by Commodore Napier; but I gave him to under- 
stand distinctly, that Convention had not been ratified by the Admiral 
Commander-in-Chief, and that I had no guarantee to offer him. I urged 
him at once to give up the Ottoman fleet, on which subject he pledged 
himself, most earnestly, that he would give it up to any officer the Sultan 
might name to take charge of it, immediately he arrived at Alexandria; or 
to the English Admiral, if so ordered; that he would lend his own officers 
and seamen to assist in navigating it; and that, as far as he was con- 
cerned, it should be ready to quit the port five days after the arrival of the 
Sultan’s officer ; and that he had already given orders for its preparation, 
(which, from information I received at the Arsenal, I believe was the case). 

At my first interview with him, he promised to comply with my 
requisition as to time, the translations of the documents to be given to me, 
and their being sent under flying seal; and he did so: and at my sugges- 
tion gave me a letter to the Governor of Candia, directing him to give up 
the island to the Sultan’s authorities, and to be prepared to quit it with the 
Egyptian troops; in short, he said he would do all that was required of 
him. With respect to the immediate evacuation of the Holy Cities, I was 
informed that the troops remaining in them, amounting to about 2,000, 
were left only for the purpose of maintaining order and security, and 
would be instructed to quit them on receiving the Sultan’s commands, or 
on the arrival of Turkish troops. 

{ shall proceed in the “ Stromboli ” to-day to Constantinople, that she 
may take in coal; and I shall be prepared to wait on the Vizier with his 
letter, when I receive the intimation from him of his wish to see me; and 
unless your Lordship should wish the steamer to return to Therapia, I 
shall await in her, in the Golden Horn, your Lordship’s instructions for 
my further guidance. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) ARTHUR FANSHAWE, 
Captain. 


Inclosure 3 in No. 124. 


Alexandria, December 8, 1840. 

IT having been determined by the Representatives of the Four Powers 
at Tiondon, who are parties to the Treaty of the 15th July, to make known 
their intentions to Mehemet Ali, through the Admiral commanding the Allied 


139 


forces in the Mediterranean, and instructions on the subject, bearing date 
14th November, having been forwarded by Lord Palmerston, Her Majesty’s 
Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, to the Honourable Sir 
Robert Stopford, I have been appointed by the Admiral to proceed to 
Alexandria to make the following communication to Mehemet Ali: viz.— 
That if Mehemet Ali will make immediate submission to the Sultan, and 
will deliver into my hands a written engagement to restore without further 
delay the Turkish fleet, and to cause his troops immediately to evacuate 
the whole of Syria, the district of Adana, the Island of Candia, Arabia, 
and the Holy Cities, the Four Powers will recommend the Sultan to 
reinstate Mehemet Ali in the Pashalic of Egypt; but I am directed also to 
state, that the recommendation will be given by the Four Powers, only in 
the event of the prompt submission of Mehemet Ali, and that I am only 
to remain three days in Alexandria to know the decision of Mehemet Ali, 
in order to convey it to Constantinople; and I am instructed further to 
require, that the written document to be given to me by Mehemet Ali 
shall be placed in my hands open, in order that [may inform myself that it 
contains the above-mentioned engagement, without which I shall not be 
empowered to convey it to Constantinople. 

. (Signed) ARTHUR FANSHAWE, 

Captain. 


No. 125. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received January 16, 1841.) 


My Lord, | Therapia, December 23, 1840. 


I RECEIVED this afternoon the Protocol of the Conference held at 
the House of the Minister for Foreign Affairs, on the 20th instant, at 
which were present Rechid Pasha, and the Representatives of the Four 
Allies, and the Dragomans of Austria and England, and M. Franceschi, 
who made the Protocol which I have now the honour to inclose. 

I have little need to explain to your Lordship the grounds upon 
which I acted; submission is the first mentioned of the conditions, upon 
which I am ordered to give advice to the Sublime Porte, and it is also the 
most important, the others being insignificant, as things have turned out. 
My duty is to see that submission has been made by Mehemet Ali-—-real 
submission, and there are many things to make it very doubtful if 
Mehemet Ali has submitted, and has not taken this matter as conces- 
sions forced upon the Sultan by the Allies for the purpose of establishing 
him in Egypt with indefinite power. Your Lordship’s instructions would 
not authorise me to say that such a submission is the submission contem- 
plated by Her Majesty’s.Government, and as I do not think it proper for 
me, under the circumstances in which I am placed, to declare that it is 
not a submission, [ have declined giving any opinion at all on the point, 
and said I would await the decision of it by the Sublime Porte, having 
stated what counsel I shall have to offer in the name of my Government, 
if the Sublime Porte accept the submission. 

Your Lordship has always declared that the Sultan is the sole judge 
and arbiter of his own interests; and you will see, in the Protocol, that 
the Representatives united cordially in disavowing intentions to act upon 
the Sultan except by counsel alone. I saw this with satisfaction, because 
endeavours have not been wanting to inspire the Ottoman Ministers with 
some jealousy of the prepotency of the Four Powers. _ Disk Shee a 

It will appear, I think, in the Protocol, that I am not alone in thinking 
the submission may be subject to doubt, for the Internuncio says that 
Mehemet Ali has made a commencement of submission. ‘This may be so, 
for the interest of Mehemet Ali is to accept the boon offered him, 
as he gives nothing for it in return; but my orders from my Government 
are not subject to be modified by me, and I cannot take upon myself the 
responsibility of acting without the most positive authority im a question 
like the present. 

Ah 


o —_ Tn Pp a ee TAT ee ee Nae re eee te ee eee © tee ee _ 4 - y 
— ————— ss t—“‘“SOCSsS — — = i ali = Ca aaah a ee a ss cm ila a ly in 
A hl a ty 

‘ . i 


140 


I will send a messenger to acquaint your Lordship with the determi- 
nation of the Sublime Porte whenever I am informed of it. 

I send the copy of the Protocol which was sent to me by his Excellency 
the Internuncio. , 

The Protocol is substantially correct in statement of what passed, but 
there are errors in its report of expressions. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure in No. 125. 


PROTOCOL of the Conference held at the House of the Minister for 
Foreign Affairs of the Sublime Porte, the 20th of December, 1840, between the 
Minister for Foreign Affairs, on one part, and the Representatwes of Austria, Great 
Britain, Prussia, and Russia, on the other. 


M. le Ministre des Affaires Etrangéres.—Vous savez, Messieurs, qu’une 
lettre a été adressée par Méhémet Ali a la Sublime Porte, et vous en connaissez 
le contenu. La Sublime Porte a également recu avant hier le mémorandum de 
la Conférence de Londres du 14 Novembre. Le Sultan m’a ordonné de vous 
demander, Messieurs, si Méhémet Ali s’est conformé par cette lettre a l’esprit 
du mémorandum, et si sa soumission doit étre considérée comme réelle ? 


M. l Ambassadeur d@ Angleterre.—Je pense que c’est au Sultan qu’il peut 
seulement appartenir de décider ce point. 


M. le Ministre des Affaires Etrangeres.—Jusqu’ici il n’y a de la part de 
Méhémet Ali que des paroles; s’il exécute les promesses faites dans la lettre, 
alors sa soumission pourra étre considérée comme réelle. 


M.l Ambassadeur d’Angleterre—Je laisse 4 mes Collégues de ,décider 1a- 
dessus. Quant 4 mol, je ne vois pour le moment rien devant moi qui m’autorise 
& m’expliquer, ni a énoncer une opinion. 


M. VInternonce d’ Autriche.—Dans le but de me décharger de toute respon- 
sabilité et de faire clairement connaitre les vues de mon Gouvernement dans une 
circonstance aussi importante, j’ai cru convenable de mettre mon vote par écrit. 
Je vais en faire la lecture 4 la Conférence:—*‘ J’ai lu et relu avec la plus scru- 
puleuse attention la lettre que Méhémet Ali vient d’adresser au Grand Vizir, et 
sur laquelle je suis appelé a dire mon opinion. Je n’y ai rien trouvé qui ne soit 
correct. Le ton qui y régne m’a paru répondre a tous les sentimens de con- 
venance. I] eut été désirable qu’il n’y ett pas été question de la Convention du 
Commodore Napier: mais nous sommes tous d’accord qu'il l’eut été bien plus 
encore que cette Convention n’eut jamais été conclue; et Méhémet Ali, en s’y 
référant, n’a fait que se prévaloir d’un avantage qui lui a été offert gratuitement. 
Il n’aurait tenu d’ailleurs qu’au Capitaine Fanshawe de ‘lui représenter qu’un 
Acte que les Commandeurs Alliés avaient déclaré nul et comme nonavenu, ne devait 
pas tre mentionné dans la lettre au Grand Vizir. Mais je ne m’appesentirai. 
pas sur cette circonstance, qui, a tout prendre, n’a plus maintenant qu’un intérét 
secondaire. Je reviens a la lettre de Méhémet Ali. Dans cette lettre le Pacha 
déclare étre prét a faire tout ce qu’on lui demande, et sous ce rapport sa sou- 
mission me parait entiére. 

“Je serais done davis que cette soumission fit acceptée; qu’un officier de 
Sa Hautesse ftit envoyé 4 Alexandrie; que Méhémet Ali recut l’injonction de lui 
remettre la flotte Ottomane; que d’aprés les termes de I’ Acte Séparé de la Conven- 
tion du 15 Juillet, les Commandeurs Alliés fussent invités A assister 4 cette remise: 
que le Pacha fat sommé d’évacuer les provinces ou villes de l’Empire Ottoman 
qu’occupent encore les troupes Egyptiennes et qui se trouvent situées en dehors 
des limites de PEgypte ; enfin, que le Grand Vizir, en répondant.a sa lettre, lui 
annongat que, ces conditions une fois remplies en entier, Sa Hautesse, par égard 
pour ses Alliés, daignerait le réinstaller dans ses fonctions de Pacha d’Egypte. 
Ce conseil est celui que la Conférence de Londres a voulu que nous donnassions 


14] 


a la Sublime Porte dans le cas of Méhémet Ali se rendrait dla sommation qui 
vient de lui étre faite. Quant au tribut, aux forces de terre et de mer, et aux 
lois qui devront gouverner l’Egypte, ces points ont été réglés d’avance par la 
Convention du 15 Juillet, et il suffira d’exécuter a cet égard les stipulations que 
renferment les Articles III, V., et VI., de l’Acte Séparé annexé A cette 
Convention. 

** Je regarderais comme regrettable 4 tous égards toute hésitation de la Porte 
@ se conformer aux conseils de ses Alliés. Les plus brillans succés ont couronné 
leurs efforts en Syrie: ces succés ont dépassé nos calculs, nos prévisions, nos 
espérances. La Syrie est rentrée sous le sceptre de Sa Hautesse, et le principal 
objet de |’Alliance se trouve ainsi rempli. Aller plus loin, n’entre pas dans les 
vues des Puissances Alliées: la Conférence de Londres s’est assez clairement 
prononcée a cet égard. La Sublime Porte peut sans doute avoir de bonnes raisons 
pour désirer l’anéantissement de Méhémet Ali; mais n’ayant pas les moyens de 
Veffectuer elle-méme, ce serait sur ses Alliés qu’en retomberait la charge. Or, 
voudrait-elle, pour prix des services qu’ils lui ont rendus, les jeter dans une 
entreprise qui mettrait en péril la paix générale si ardemment désirée par tous 
les peuples et si heureusement maintenue jusqu’ici. 

“est vers la France surtout, que se porte aujourd’hui l’attention de nos 
Gouvernemens ; cette Puissance a droit 4 leurs égards et a leur intérét; et si 
Vattitude menacante et belliqueuse du Ministére Thiers n’a pu les arréter dans 
leur marche vers le but qu’ils se proposaient et qu’ils ont atteint, ils semblent 
désormais vouloir vouer tous leurs soins 4 ménager le Ministére qui lui succéde, 
et dont le langage annonce une politique sage, modérée, et conciliante. Ils 
doivent en conséquence entrer dans sa position, faire la part des difficultés dont 
il est entouré, et ne pas l’exposer a se voir entrainé malgré lui dans une fausse 
route. Dans |’état ot sont les esprits en France, un incident imprévu peut tout: 
bouleverser, et n’est-il pas dans lintérét de tous et dans celui de la justice, 
qu’on s’unisse franchement 4 ceux qui la gouvernent, pour prévenir un pareil 
malheur ?” 

M. I’Internonce donne ensuite lecture des paragraphes 3, 4, 5, and 6, de 
VActe Séparé du 15 Juillet. 


M. VEnvoyé de Prusse.—Je partage lopinion de M. l’Internonce. La 
démarche de Méhémet Ali me parait en effet conforme a l’esprit du Mémorandum. 
Je pense, en outre, que Méhémet Ali ayant solicité son pardon du Sultan, la 
Sublime Porte ne devrait pas agir avec trop de sévérité contre lui; qu’elle 
devrait au contraire se préter a des explications, et faire preuve de mesure et de 
modération, non seulement dans l’intérét de la Porte elle-méme, mais encore 
dans l’interét général de l'Europe. 


M. le Chargé d’ Affaires de Russie—Dans tout ce qui a trait a la question 
générale les vues de mon Gouvernement ne sauraient différer de celles des Trois 
autres Cours ses Alliées; mes instructions sont basées sur ce principe. Dans. 
la question spéciale qui fait Vobjet de cette Conférence, les documens existans 
doivent nous indiquer la marche et les régles 4 suivre; or, cette marche et ces. 
régles me semblent déja tracés par le mémorandum de la Conférence de Londres 
du 14 Novembre, et par la dépéche de Lord Palmerston du 15 Octobre. Le 
‘mémorandum ne m’est pas encore parvenu de mon Gouvernement ; c’est M. 
VInternonce qui a eu Pobligeance de me le communiquer ; j’ai seulement recu la 
dépéche de Lord Palmerston, qui est mentionnée, et je crois me conformer au sens 
de ces piéces, en m/’associant, dans la circonstance dont il s’agit, au vote émis 
par M. I’Internonce. 


M. l Ambassadeur d’ Anqleterre.—La question, je le répéte, me semble 
dépendre du fait de la soumission de Méhémet Ali, et le Sultan me parait seul 
juge dans une semblable question; il a seul le droit de prononcer. Si la Sublime 
Porte nous fait connaitre que le Sultan a agréé la soumission de Méhémet Ah, 
qwil en est satisfait, les ordres de mon Gouvernement me prescrivent de con- 
seiller, dans ce cas, & la Sublime Porte d’accorder 4 Méhémet Ali le gouverne- 
ment héréditaire de ’Egypte. Jusque 1a, jusqu’a ce que la Porte nous fasse 
connaitre la décision du Sultan, je dois m’abstenir de tout conseil, de toute 


opinion. 


Sty 


Sw eS SS ae 


Le Ministre des Affaires Etrangéres.—Il y a différens genres de soumission. 
Méhémet Ali aurait pu, par exemple, venir lui-méme, d’aprés nos usages, ou en~ 
voyer quelqu’un pour implorer sa grace; mais ce n’est pas ce que nous préten- 
dons. Le mémorandum veut que Méhémet Ali restitue la flotte, qu’il évacue 
certains pays. Il écrit qu’il fera tout cela; s’il accomplit ces promesses, la 
Sublime Porte pourra croire 4 la soumission, mais la lettre ne peut pas etre con- 
sidérée par elle seule comme une soumission réelle. 


M. l’Internonce d’ Autriche.—La lettre est un commencement de soumission. 
Si la Sublime Porte demande la remise de la flotte, que Méhémet Ali la restitue, 
et qu'il évacue les pays désignés dans le mémorandum, sa soumission sera cer- 


tainement alors complete. 


M. le Chargé d’ Affaires de Russie-—Il est certain que nous ne pourrons 
considérer la soumission de Méhémet Ali comme accomplie que lorsqu’il aura 
rendu la flotte, et évacué les Villes Saintes, ainsi que les autres leux nommés 
dans le mémorandum: mais nous devons pour le moment nous en tenir au texte 
du mémorandum et de l’instruction adressée par  Amirauté a |’Amiral Stopford, 
ot il est fait mention d’une lettre a étre remise par Méhémet Ali a Vofficier 
chargé de lui signifier la décision de la Conférence de Londres. 


M. Il’ Internonce.-—Que pouvait faire de plus Méhémet Ali? Il devait com- 
mencer par dire qu’il se soumettait, et il ne pouvait dans la méme heure effectuer 
toutes les conditions de sa soumission. 


M. le Ministre des Affaires Etrangéres, faisant allusion 4 ce qu’avait dit 
M. l’Ambassadeur d’ Angleterre, fait observer que jusqu’ici il n’avait point été 
question d’hérédité. 


M. lInternonce.—Je ne suis pas appelé dans ce moment a discuter cet objet, 
sur lequel je n’ai point d’instruction precise, mais, le cas échéant, je me confor- 
merai entiérement sur ce point a ce que fera M. l’ Ambassadeur d’ Angleterre. 


M. ? Ambassadeur d@ Angleterre-—Pour moi, j’ai l’ordre précis de conseiller 4 
la Sublime Porte de concéder V’hérédité 4 Méhémet Ali, dés qu’elle nous fera con- 
naitre que le Sultan est satisfait de la soumission de Méhémet Ali; mais ce 
conseil ne peut qu’étre conditionnel; je n’ai pas le droit de juger de la réalité de 
la soumission, et je dois attendre, pour le donner, que le Sultan se prononce sur 
le fait de la soumission. 


M. l’Internonce.—Quant a moi, je dois le répéter, j’envisage la lettre de 
Méhémet Ali comme un premier pas vers sa soumission. 


M. ? Ambassadeur d@ Angleterre—Je ne pourrai agir dans le sens des instruc- 
tions de mon Gouvernement que lorsque la Sublime Porte aura déclaré qu’elle 
considére la soumission de Méhémet Ali comme compléte. Mais je ne puis 
demander au Sultan une déclaration quelconque a ce sujet, car je croirais em- 
piéter sur ses droits. C’est a Sa Majesté a décider. 


M. ?Envoyé de Prusse.—Je pense, ainsi que je Vai déja dit, que la Sublime 
Porte ne doit pas user en cette circonstance de trop de sévérité, et je dois ’engager 
toujours a la modération. 


M. le Mimstre des Affaires Etrangéres.—La Porte n’a jamais voulu agir avec 
sévérité; les faits Pont déja prouvé. Elle ne le veut pas méme aujourd’hui. 
Elle veut, au contraire, agir de concert avec ses Alliés, et quoique ce soit sans 
doute au Sultan a décider sur la soumission de Méhémet Ali, néanmoins, comme 
ses Alliés ont déclaré leurs intentions dans le mémorandum, j’ai cru devoir con- 
sulter leurs Représentans pour savoir si la démarche de Méhémet Ali est conforme 
4 Vesprit du mémorandum; mais, puisqu’il y a dissidence dans leurs opinions 
on pourrait s’en remettre a la décision de la Conférence de Londres. , 


es fd : Me 
M. l’Internonce.—Mais il n’y a point de dissidence entre nous ; nous pensons 
tous que la soumission de Méhémet Ali, pour devenir complete, doit étre suivie 


?, ° e,e . ° ° ’ 
de Vexécution des conditions qui lui sont imposées. Je pense encore, que ren- 
voyer la question a la décision de la Conférence de Londres, ce serait en appeler 
de la Conférence 4 la Conférence, et perdre du temps en ajournemens inutiles. 


. Le Mimsire des Affaires Etrangéres.—Je crois que Méhémet Ali doit d’abord 
exeécuter les conditions qui lui sont imposées; quant 4 l’hérédité, c’est une autre 
question sur laquelle je ne suis pas préparé 4 m’expliquer. 


M. P’Internonce déclare encore une fois que, le moment venu, il s’associera 
sur ce point aux démarches de M. Ambassadeur d’Angleterre, et M. l’Envoyé 
de Prusse fait la méme déclaration. 


Le Mimstre des Affaires Etrangéres.—Vous savez, Messieurs, qu’d son 
avénement au trone, le Sultan avait accordé & Méhémet Ali Vadministration 
héréditaire de Egypte; il a rejeté cette faveur. Le Traité du 15 Juillet la lui a 
accordée encore plus tard, dans le but d’épargner l’effusion du sang; Méhémet 
Ali V’a également rejetée. Tl a fallu recourir aux mesures coércitives, et le 
Sultan a retiré cette faveur. Aujourd’hui, il me semble qu’il ne peut plus étre 
question d’un droit en faveur de Méhémet Ali, et que le Sultan est libre de se 
décider sur ce point. 


Messieurs les Représentans sont tous unanimes a reconnaitre que le Sultan a 
toute sa liberté d’action a cet égard, et que Méhémet Ali ne saurait invoquer 
aucun droit. 


M. V Envoyé de Prusse a ajouté que toute concession en faveur de Méhémet 
Ali ne saurait étre envisagée que comme un effet de la générosité du Sultan, car 
Vindépendance de Sa Hautesse est le but de la Convention du 15 Juillet; mais 
plus la position du Sultan est avantageuse aujourd’hui, et plus elle lui permettra 
peut-étre d’étre généreux. 


Le Ministre des Affaires Etrangéres—Puisque Méhémet Ali a rejeté le 
Traité du 15 Juillet, ce Traité n’existe plus pour lui, et ’on pourrrait imposer a 
Méhémet Ali d’autres conditions. 


M. U0 Internonce.— Mais le Traité existe toujours pour nous. 


M. 1 Ambassadeur d’ Angleterre.—Je déclare que, dans mon opinion, Méhémet 
Ali n’a aucun droit aujourd’hui, que le Sultan est le maitre de prendre le parti 
qu’il croira convenable, et que nous ne pouvons que lui préter nos conseils. — 


Le Ministre des Affaires Etrangéres, s’adressant 4 M. |’Internonce, lui dit: — 
Votre Excellence a commencé par dire que si le Sultan est satisfait de la lettre 
de Méhémet Ali, on devrait accepter sa soumission. Mais Méhémet Ali a déja 
écrit mille lettres semblables. Peut-on ajouter foi a ses lettres? [II est évident 
d’ailleurs qu’il y a de la ruse méme dans cette derniére lettre. Par exemple, il 
parle de la Convention du Commodore Napier, qui est un Acte nul, pour aborder 
le sujet de Phérédité. 


M. UInternonce.—Cela est vrai, mais on ne peut comparer cette lettre 
donnée par suite d’une sommation qui lui est faite par |’Amiral Anglais, au nom 
des Quatre Puissances, 4 toutes celles qu’il a adressées de son chef a la Sublime: 
Porte, et nommément 4 Hosrew Pacha. . 


M. le Ministre des Affaires Etrangéres—Vous concevez, Messieurs,. qu’il 
faut qu’en tout cas la Porte ait le temps de réfléchir sur cette affaire. 


M.I’Internonce.—Assurément, une affaire de ce genre ne peut étre baclée 
dans un jour; il faut sans doute que votre Excellence puisse se concerter avec 
ses Collégues et prendre les ordres du Sultan. 


M. le Ministre des Affaires Etrangéres fait observer que, devant soumettre au 
Conseil et au Sultan son rapport sur la Conférence de ce jour, il désire savoir, 
en définitive, quelle est la conclusion qu’il doit leur faire connaitre. 


144 


Messieurs les Représentans répondent que, leur opinion se trouvant consignée. 
dans le présent Protocole, ils s’y référent. ) 


M.V Ambassadeur d’ Angleterre.—Je répéte que je dois attendre la décision du 
Sultan pour donner le conseil qui m/’est prescrit par les ordres de mon 
Gouvernement. 


M.V’Internonce fait observer encore une fois combien il serait regrettable que 
la Porte ne se conformat pas avec promptitude au voeu exprimé par les Cours 
Alliées dans le mémorandum du 14 Novembre. 


(Translation.) 


The Minister for Foreign Affairs—You are aware, gentlemen, that a 
letter was addressed by Mehemet Ali to the Sublime Porte, and you are 
acquainted with its contents. The Sublime Porte yesterday received likewise 
the Memorandum of the Conference of London of the 14th of November. The 
Sublime Porte directs me to ask you, gentlemen, if Mehemet Ali by this 
letter has complied with the spirit of the Memorandum, and if his submission 


ought to be considered as real ? 


The Ambassador of England.—I think that it belongs to the Sultan alone 
to decide this point. 


The Minister for Foreign Affairs.—Up to this time there have only been 
words on the part of Mehemet Ali; if he executes the promises made in the 
letter, then his submission may be considered as real. 


The Ambassador of England.—I leave to my Colleagues to decide upon 
that point. As for me, I see nothing before me at present which can autho- 
rise me in explaining myself, or in giving an opinion. 


The Internuncio of Austria. —With the view of relieving myself from all 
responsibility, and of making the views of my Government in so important a 
matter clearly manifest, I have deemed it fitting to give my vote in writing. 
I will now read it to the Conference :—‘‘I have read over and over again 
with the most scrupulous attention the letter which Mehemet Ali has ‘just 
addressed to the Grand Vizier, and on which I am called upon to pronounce 
my opinion. I have found nothing in it which is not correct. The tone 
which pervades it has appeared to me to be altogether proper. It might have 
been desirable that no allusion had been made to the Convention of Commo- 
dore Napier; but we are all agreed that it would have been much more so 
that the Convention in question had never béen concluded; and Mehemet 
Ali, by referring to it, has only made use of an advantage which has been 
gratuitously offered to him. Besides, it was Captain Fanshawe alone who 
should have represented to him that an Act which the Allied commanders had 
declared null and of no effect, ought not to be mentioned in the letter to the 
Grand Vizier. But I will not dwell on this point, which, after all, is now 
only of secondary interest. I return to Mehemet Ali’s letter. In this letter 
the Pasha declares himself ready to do all that is required of him, and in 
this respect his submission appears to me entire. 

‘IT should then be of opmion that this submission should be accepted; 
that an officer of His Highness should be sent to Alexandria; that Mehemet 
Ali should be enjoined to deliver up to him the Ottoman fleet; that, accord- 
ing to the terms of the Separate Act of the Convention of the 15th of July 
the Allied Commanders should be invited to assist at such delivery ; that sie 
Pasha should be summoned to evacuate the provinces or cities of the Ottoman 
Empire still occupied by the Egyptian troops, and situated beyond the limits 
of Egypt; finally, that the Grand Vizier, in replying to his letter, should 
announce to him that when once these conditions should be entirely fulfilled 
His Highness, from deference to his Allies, would be pleased to reinstate 
him in his functions as Pasha of Egypt. This advice is what the Con- 
ference of London wished that we should give to the Sublime Porte, in case 


145 


Mehemet Ali should yield to the summons about to be made to him. As for 
the tribute, the land and sea forces, and the laws which must govern 
Egypt, those points have been settled beforehand by the Convention cf the 
15th of July, and it will be sufficient to execute in this respect the stipula- 
tions contained in the IIIrd, Vth, and VIth Articles of the Separate Act 
annexed to the Convention. 

“I should consider as in every respect to be regretted any hesitation on 
the part of the Porte to comply with the advice of its Allies. The most 
brilliant successes have crowned their efforts in Syria; those successes have 
surpassed our calculations, our anticipations, our expectations. Syria has 
returned to the rule of His Highness, and thus the principal object of the 
Alliance is accomplished. To proceed further, does not enter into the views 
of the Allied Powers; the Conference of London has pronounced with 
sufficient distinctness in this respect. The Sublime Porte may doubtless 
have good reasons to desire the destruction of Mehemet Ali; butas it has not 
the means of effecting it itself, the task of doing so would devolve upon its 
Allies. Now would it desire, in return for the services which they have 
rendered to it, to involve them in an undertaking which would endanger the 
general peace, so ardently desired by all people, and so happily maintained 
up to the present time ? 

‘« It is especially towards France that the attention of our Governments is 
at present directed; that Power is entitled to their respect and their consi- 
deration ; and if the menacing and warlike attitude of the Thiers Ministry 
could not stay them in their course towards the end which they proposed to 
themselves, and which they have attained, they appear henceforth to be 
desirous to dedicate all their care to keep well with the Ministry which 
succeeds it, and whose language announces a prudent, moderate, and conci- 
liatory policy. They must consequently enter into its position, make 
allowances for the difficulties by which it is surrounded, and not expose it to 
be hurried along against its will in a false course. In the present state of 
sentiments in France an unlooked-for event might subvert everything; and is 
it not for the interest of all and for that of justice, that they should frankly 
unite themselves with those who govern France, to prevent a like calamity?’ 

The Internuncio thereupon reads the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth 
paragraphs of the Separate Act of the 15th of July. 


The Envoy of Prussia.—I partake of the opinion of the Internuncio. 
Mehemet Ali’s proceeding appears to me in fact to be in conformity with the 
spirit of the Memorandum. I think besides, that Mehemet Ali having soli- 
cited his pardon of the Sultan, the Sublime Porte ought not to act with too 
great severity against him; that, on the contrary, it ought to lend itself to 

explanations, and to evince consideration and moderation, not only for the 
interest of the Porte itself, but also for the general interest of Europe. 


The Chargé d Affaires of Russia.—In all that relates to the general ques- 
tion the views of my Government cannot differ from those of the three other 
Courts, its Allies; my instructions are founded on that principle. In the 
special question which forms the object of this Conference, the existing © 
documents ought to point out to us the course and the rules to be observed ; 
now this course and these rules appear to me to be already laid down by the 
Memorandum of the Conference of London of the 14th of November, and by 
Lord Palmerston’s despatch of the 15th of October. The Memorandum 
has not yet reached me from my Government; it is the Internuncio who has 
had the goodness to communicate it to me; I have only received Lord 
Palmerston’s despatch which is mentioned, and I conceive that I shall 
conform to the meaning of these documents by joining, under existing 
circumstances, in the vote pronounced by the Internuncio. 


The Ambassador of England.—The question, I repeat, appears to me to 
depend upon the fact of the submission of Mehemet Ali, and the Sultan 
appears to me to be the sole judge in such a question: he alone has the 
right to decide. If the Sublime Porte informs us that the Sultan has accepted 
Mehemet Ali’s submission, that he is satisfied with it, the orders of my 
Government enjoin me in such a case to advise the Porte to grant to Mehemet 


146 


Ali the hereditary government of Egypt. Until that time, until the Porte 
communicates to us the decision of the Sultan, I must abstain from giving 
any advice, any opinion. 

The Minister for Foreign Affairs—There are different kinds of submission. 
Mehemet Ali might, for example, have come himself, according to our usages, 
or have sent some one to implore his pardon; but that is not what we mean. 
The Memorandum requires that Mehemet Ali should restore the fleet, that 
he should evacuate certain countries. He writes that he will do all this; if 
he accomplishes these promises, the Sublime Porte will be able to credit his 
submission, but the letter cannot of itself alone be considered as a real 
submission. 


The Internuncio of Austria.—The letter is a commencement of submission. 
If the Sublime Porte demands the delivery of the fleet, if Mehemet Ali restores 
it, and if he evacuates the countries specified in the Memorandum ; his submis- 
sion will certainly be then complete. 


The Chargé d’ Affaires of Russia.—It is certain that we shall not be able 
to consider the submission of Mehemet Ali as completed until he shall have 
restored the fleet, and evacuated the Holy Cities, as well as the other places 
specified in the Memorandum ; but for the present we should abide by the text 
‘of the Memorandum and of the instruction addressed by the Admiralty to Ad- 
miral Stopford, wherein mention is made of a letter to be delivered by Mehemet 
Ali to the officer commissioned to notify to him the decision of the Con- 
ference of London. 


The Internuncio.—What more could Mehemet Ali do? He must begin 
by saying that he submitted, and he could not at the same instant carry into 
effect all the conditions of his submission. 


The Minister for Foreign Affairs, alluding to what the Ambassador of 
England had said, observes, that up to the present time there had been no 
question of hereditary succession. 


The Internuncio.—I am not at this moment called upon to discuss that 
point, on which I have no precise instruction; but, the case occurring, I shall 
conform myself altogether on that matter to what the Ambassador of England 
shall do. | 


The Ambassador of England.—For my part, I have precise orders to advise 
the Porte to grant hereditary succession to Mehemet Ali, so soon as it shall 
apprize us that thé Sultan is satisfied with the submission of Mehemet Ali; 
but such advice can only be conditional ; I have not the right to judge of the 
reality of the submission, and I must wait, before giving it, for the Sultan to 
pronounce himself on the fact of the submission. 


The Internuncio.—As for me, I must repeat it, I look upon the letter of 
Mehemet Ali, as a first step towards his submission. 


The Ambassador of England.—It will not be in my power to act in the 
sense of the instructions of my Government, until the Sublime Porte shall 
have declared that it considers the submission of Mehemet Ali as complete. 
But I cannot demand of the Sultan any declaration whatever on that matter, 
Fe sibecines think that I trenched upon his rights. It is for His Majesty to 

ecide. 


The Envoy of Prussia.—I think, as I have already said, that the Sublime 
Porte ought not in the present case to act with too great severity, and I must 
always exhort it to act with moderation. 


The Mimster for Foreign Affairs.—The Porte has never wished to act with 
severity ; facts have already proved it. It does not wish to do so even now. 
It wishes, on the contrary, to act in concert with its Allies; and although it 


147 


is doubtless for the Sultan to decide on the submission of Mehemet Ahi, 
nevertheless, as his Allies have declared their intentions in the Memorandum, 
I have thought it right to consult their Representatives to know whether 
Mehemet Ali’s proceeding is in conformity with the spirit of the Memorandum: 
but, since their opinions are at variance, they might refer to the decision of 
the Conference of London. 


The Internuncio.—But there is no variance between us; we all think that 
Mehemet Ali’s submission, in order that it should be complete, must be fol- 
lowed by the execution of the conditions which are imposed upon him. Tf 
think, moreover, that to refer the question to the decision of the Conference 
of London would be to appeal from the Conference to the Conference, and 
lose time in useless adjournments. 


The Mimster for Foreign Affairs.—I think that Mehemet Ali must first 
execute the conditions imposed upon him; as for the hereditary succession, 
that is another question upon which I am not prepared to explain myself. 


The Internuncio once more declares, that when the time arrives, he will 
concur in the steps of the Ambassador of England on that point, and the 
Envoy of Prussia makes the same declaration. 


The Minister for Foreign Affairs—You are aware, gentlemen, that on his 
accession to the throne the Sultan had granted to Mehemet Ali the hereditary 
administration of Egypt; he rejected that favour. Still later, with the view 
of sparing the shedding of blood, the Treaty of July 15 granted it to him; 
Mehemet Ali equally rejected it. It was necessary to have recourse to 
measures of coercion, and the Sultan withdrew this favour from him. At 
present it appears to me that there can no longer be a question of a right in 
favour of Mehemet Ali, and the Sultan is free to take his decision on this 
point. 


The Representatives unanimously admitted that the Sultan possesses his 
entire freedom of action in this respect, and that Mehemet Ali could not 
appeal to any right. , 


The Envoy of Prussia added, that any concession in favour of Mehemet 
Ali could only be considered as an effect of the Sultan’s generosity; for the 
independence of His Highness is the object of the Convention of July 15; 
but the more advantageous the Sultan’s position is at the present time, the 
more will it perhaps allow him to be generous. 


The Minister for Foreign Affairs.—Since Mehemet Ali has rejected the 
Treaty of July 15, that Treaty no longer exists for him, and other conditions 
might be imposed on Mehemet Ali. 


The Internuncio.—But the Treaty continues to exist for us. 


The Ambassador of England.—I declare that; in my opinion, Mehemet 
Ali has now no right; that.the Sultan is master to take the course which he 
shall consider fitting, and that we can only afford him our advice. 


The Minister for Foreign Affairs, addressing himself to the Internuncio, 
says to him: Your Excellency began by saying, that if the Sultan is satisfied 
with the letter of Mehemet Al, his submission ought to be accepted. But 
Mehemet Ali has already written a thousand letters of the same kind. Can 
any faith be placed in his letters? It is evident besides that there 1s some 
trick even in this last letter. For example, he speaks of Commodore Napier’s 
Convention, which is a void Act, in order to come to the subject of hereditary 
succession. 


The Internuncio.—That is true; but this letter, given in consequence of a 
summons made to him by the English Admiral in the name of the Four 
Powers, cannot be compared to all those which he has addressed of hjs own 
accord to the Sublime Porte, and PERCY to Hosrew Pasha. 


148 


The Minister for Foreign Affairs.—You understand, gentlemen, that in 
any case it is necessary that the Porte should have time to reflect upon this 
matter. 


The Internuncio.—Assuredly, an affair of this kind cannot be concluded 
ina day; it is, doubtless, necessary that your Excellency should be able to 
concert with your Colleagues, and take the orders of the Sultan. 


The Minister for Foreign Affairs observes, that having to submit to the 
Council and to the Sultan his report on the Conference of this day, he is 
desirous of knowing, definitively, what is the conclusion which he should 
communicate to them. 


The Representatives reply that their opinion being recorded in the present 
Protocol, they refer themselves to it. 


The Ambassador of England.—I repeat that I must wait for the decision 
of the Sultan to give the advice which is enjoined to me by the orders of my 
Government. 


The Internuncio observes once again how much it would be to be regretted 
if the Porte should not conform with promptitude to the wish expressed 
by the Allied Courts in the Memorandum of the 14th of November. 


No. 126. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received January 16, 1841.) 


My Lord, Therapia, December 23, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to inclose a translation of Mehemet Ali’s letter 
to the Grand Vizier, which is more correct than that I sent in my despatch 
of the 16th instant ; and the translation of a letter from Mehemet Ali to 
the Military Governor of Candia, which letter is mentioned in Captain 
_Fanshawe’s report to me (forwarded to your Lordship), but which was 
not in my hands till yesterday. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 126. 
Mehemet Ali to the Grand Vizier. 


(Traduction.) 


Aprés les titres d’usage. Le 17 Chewal, 1256 
Le Ii Dec., 1840 * 


MONSIEUR LE COMMODORE NAPIER de la flotte Britannique 
m/’a fait savoir par une dépéche datée de devant Alexandrie le 22 Novembre 
N. S., que les Grandes Puissances Alliées ont prié la Sublime Porte 
de m’octroyer le Gouvernement héréditaire de VEgypte aux conditions 
par elles établies, savoir: que je rendrai la flotte Impériale qui se trouve 
dans le Port d’Alexandrie, et que les troupes Egyptiennes se retireront de 
la Syrie, et rentreront en Egypte. } 

M. le Commodore a demandé que l’on mit de la diligence a préparer 
la flotte pour qu’elle soit rendue, et a faire retirer les troupes de la Side 

Aprés une certaine correspondance et quelques pourparlers. avec le 
Commodore sur cette affaire, ces conditions ont été acceptées, et un Acte 
authentique, faisant voir que l’on s’attend a ce que la faveur de celui qui est 
Vombre de Dieu, soit accordée, et servant de document a lune et teviele 
partie, a été conclu et signé. 


149 


En conséquence, j’ai écrit 4 mon fils Ibrahim Pacha, votre serviteur, 
de venir tout de suite en Egypte avec les troupes Egyptiennes qui sont 
reunies 4 Damas, et avec ses employés et autres gens, et je lui ai méme 
envoyé a cet effet un homme exprés que j’ai fait partir sur un bateau a 
vapeur que M. le Commodore a procuré. 

Je viens maintenant de recevoir d’Ibrahim Pacha, voie de terre, une 
dépéche en date du ler:Ramazan (le 27 Octobre), d’aprés laquelle il 
devait se mettre en route, avec tout son monde, de Damas, le 3 ou le 4 
Chewal (le 28 ou le 29 Novembre). Ainsi, l’on doit regarder comme positif 
qu'il s’est mis en route a l’époque annoncée. 

Et voici que sur ces entrefaites, je recois de lAmiral de la flotte 
Britannique, son Excellence Sir R. Stopford, une dépéche officielle écrite a 
la hauteur de Chypre, le 6 Décembre, et concue dans le sens ci-dessous 
énoncé. M.1l’Amiral m’a envoyé, en méme tems, copie des instructions 
qwil avait recues de la part de son Excellence: Lord Palmerston. Je vois 
par cette communication quw’il a été stipulé que je dois renouveler ma 
soumission 4 la Sublime Porte, en rendant la flotte impériale, et en faisant 
évacuer par les troupes Egyptiennes la Syrie, Adana, la Créte, le Hedjaz, 
et les deux Villes Saintes. 

Je reconnais que l’obtention de mon pardon, que ma rentrée dans les 
bonnes graces de mon Souverain et maitre, au service duquel je saisis cette 
occasion de consacrer ma fortune et ma vie, et la gracieuse acceptation 
par Sa Majesté Impériale de ma trés-humble soumission, sont les effets 
des nobles efforts des Hautes Puissances Alliées; et parfaitement recon- 
naissant pour tout cela, j’ai pris des mesures pour la restitution de la 
flotte impériale. On travaille avec activité 4 mettre les vaisseaux en bon 
état; et ala réception d’un firman faisant connaitre de quelle maniére il 
aura plu a Sa Majesté Impériale que la flotte soit consignée et expédiée, 
je m’empresserai de me conformer ala volonté souveraine en mettant le dit 
firman a exécution. 

Egalement, comme je suis prét 4 retirer tous les employés Egyptiens 
quise trouvent dans I’Ile de Candie, dans le Hedjaz, et dans les deux Villes 
‘Saintes, 4 larrivée d’un firman de Sa Majesté Impériale a cet égard, les 
endroits ci-dessus mentionnés seront évacués sans délai par les employés 
Egyptiens. 

_Ainsi donc, lorsque votre Altesse aura, s’il plait 4 Dieu, pris connais- 
sance de ma prompte soumission, effectuée comme ci-dessus, elle voudra 
bien la mettre aux pieds de la clémence de mon trés-auguste et trés- 
puissant Souverain et maitre, dont je suis tant fier et tant orgueilleux d’étre 
le serviteur fidéle et soumis, et employer ses bons offices afin de faire 
éprouver sans cesse les effets de la clémence souveraine 4 un homme avancé 
en age et fidéle, qui a vieilli 4 son service. 

Celui qui peut ordonner, ordonnera. 


(L.S.) MEHEMET ALI 


(Translation.) 


UJ 17 Ch 1, 1256 
After the usual Titles, December il, 1810 


COMMODORE NAPIER, of the British fleet, informed me by a des- 
patch dated from before Alexandria, the 22nd of November, N.S., that 
the Great Allied Powers have requested the Sublime Porte to grant me 
the hereditary Government of Egypt, on the conditions laid down by 
them; that is, that I shall give up the Imperial fleet which is in the Port 
of Alexandria, and that the Egyptian troops shall retire from Syria, and 
re-enter Kgypt. ; 

The Commodore required that diligence should be used in preparing 

‘the fleet, in order to its being delivered up, and in withdrawing the troops 
from Syria. ! 

After some correspondence and some discussions with the Commodore 
on this matter, these conditions were accepted, and an authentic Act, 

‘manifesting that it is expected, that the favour of him who is the shadow 


150 


of God, should be granted, and serving as a document to both parties, 
was concluded and signed. 

In consequence, | wrote to my son, [brahim Pasha, your servant, to 
come immediately to Egypt with the Egyptian troops concentrated at Da- 
mascus, and with the persons in his employment, and others, and I even 
sent to him a person expressly for this purpose, whom I despatched in a 
steam-vessel procured by the Commodore. 

I have just received from Ibrahim Pasha, overland, a despatch dated 
the Ist of Ramazan, (October 27,) according to which, he was to set out, 
with all his people, from Damascus, the 3rd or 4th of Chewal (the 28th 
or 29th of November). Thus, it may be looked upon as certain that he 
commenced his march at the specified time. 

And now, in the meanwhile, I receive from the Admiral of the British 
fleet, his Excellency Sir Robert Stopford, an official despatch written off 
Cyprus, on the 6th of December, and couched. in the ‘sense mentioned 
below. The Admiral sent to me, at the same time, a copy of the instruc- 
tions which he had received from his Excellency Lord Palmerston. Isee by 
this communication, that it has been stipulated that I must renew my 
submission to the Sublime Porte, restoring the Imperial fleet, and 
causing Syria, Adana, Candia, the Hedjaz, and the two Holy Cities, to 
be evacuated by the Egyptian troops. 

I perceive that the obtaining my pardon, that my re-admission into 
the good graces of my Sovereign and master, to whose service I take this 
opportunity of dedicating my fortune and my life, and the gracious accep- 
tance by His Imperial Majesty of my most humble submission, are the effects 
of the noble efforts of the high Allied Powers; and thoroughly grateful 
for all this, I have taken measures for restoring the Imperial fleet. People 
are actively employed in putting the vessels into a good state; and on the 
receipt of a firman, making known in what manner it shall have pleased 
His Imperial Majesty that the fleet shall be delivered up and despatched, 
I will hasten to conform myself to the Sovereign will by carrying the said 
firman into execution. a 

In hke manner, as Iam ready to withdraw all the Egyptian autho- 
rities who are in the Island of Candia, in the Hedjaz, and in the two Holy 
Cities, on the arrival of His Imperial Majesty’s firman in that respect, the 
above-mentioned places shall be evacuated without delay by the Egyptian 
Authorities. 

Thus, then, when your Excellency shall, if it please God, have taken 
cognizance of my prompt submission, carried into effect as above, you will 
be pleased to lay itat the feet of the clemency ofmy most august and most 
powerful Sovereign and Master, of whom I am so proud to be the faithful 
and submissive servant, and to employ your good offices, in order to cause 
a man advanced in age, and faithful, who has grown old in his service, to 
experience without ceasing the effects of his sovereign clemency. 

He who can ordain, will ordain. 


(LS) MEHEMET ALI. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 126. 
Mehemet Ali to the Muhafiz, Military Governor of Candia. 


(Traduction.) 


Le 17 Chewal, 1256. 
Le 1] Decembre, 1840. 


A SON Excellence le Muhafiz de Candie, Pacha trés-honoré, mon cher et 
bien-aimé fils. 

Vous savez déja, parce qu’on vous en a informé il y a quelque tems, que 
la question qui s’agite actuellement est en voie d’accommodement. 

Mais vous saurez aussi que je viens de recevoir de la part de son Excellence 
Sir Robert Stopford, l’ Amiral de la flotte Anglaise, une dépéche officielle, d’apres 
laquelle le Gouvernement héréditaire de ’Egypte va m’étre accordé Ala priére 
des Cours Alliées. 


151 


Cela étant, et attendu que I’Ile de Créte sera évacuée aussi, il faut que 
vous vous y prépariez en attendant qu’un firman réglant le mode de l’évacuation 
arrive de la part de la Sublime Porte, et qu’aprés cela, vous vous embarquiez 
pour venir sur les batimens que j’enverrai. 

Je demande donc que votre Excellence, informée qu’elle sera du contenu de 
cette lettre, commence les préparatifs de voyage. 


(Signd) MEHEMET ALI. 


(Translation.) 


17th Chewal. 

TO his Excellency the Muhafiz of Candia, most honoured Pasha, my dear 
and well-beloved son. 

You are already aware, because you have been informed of it some time 
ago, that the question now in agitation is in the way of being settled. 

But you will also know that I have just received from his Excellency Sir 
Robert Stopford, Admiral of the English fleet, an official despatch, according 
te which, the hereditary Government of Egypt is about to be granted to me, at 
the request of the Allied Courts. 

That being the case, and seeing that the Island of Candia will also be 
evacuated, it is necessary that you should make preparations for doing so in ex- 
pectation of the arrival of a firman on the part of the Sublime Porte, regulating 
the manner of the evacuation, and that, thereupon, you should embark for this 
place, in the vessels which I will send. 

I require, therefore, that your Excellency, being made acquainted with the 


_ contents of this letter, should make preparations for your voyage. 


(Signed) MEHEMET ALI. 


No. 127. 


Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received January 12, 1841.) 


(Extract.) Vienna, January 3, 1841. 

I HAVE communicated to Prince Metternich your Lordship’s 
despatch of December 18, addressed to myself, and your despatches to 
Lord Ponsonby of December 12 and 17, and his Highness has directed 
the Internuncio to co-operate with Lord Ponsonby in carrying out the 
instructions conveyed in the above despatches, and to consider them as 
obligatory upon himself. 


SS SS A 


No. 128. 


Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received January 12.) 


My Lord, Vienna, January 3, 1841. 

I AM requested by Prince Metternich to state to your Lordship, that 
in case the Porte should hesitate to accede to the recommendation of the 
Allied Powers to confer the hereditary Government of Egypt upon 
Mehemet Ali, this Court does not admit that the Allies can allow them- 
selves to be compromised by such hesitation. Prince Metternich enter- 


_ tains no doubt of the Porte’s deferring to the advice of the Allies, if it 


be firmly and conjointly urged. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) BEAUVALE. 


152 


No. 129. 


Lord Clanricarde to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received January 23, 1841.) 


(Extract.) . St. Petersburgh, December 29, 1840. 


THE language which M. de Barante holds to Count Nesselrode, and 
to myself, is, that the Turkish Question is no wise concluded by Commo- 
dore Napier’s successes and negotiations, but is only now beginning ; 
that it is impossible to leave Turkey in the state of evident debility into 
which, he says, that important country has fallen; and that this state 
of things must be considered by all the Great Powers of Europe, and 
some provision made against the contingencies, which it renders not 
improbable. Count Nesselrode replies, that the danger with which 
Mehemet Ali menaced the Sublime Porte having been averted, and its 
recurrence guarded against, no occasion exists for other provisional 
engagements to meet events which appear very remote. 


No. 130. 


Lord Clanricarde to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received January 23, 1841.) 


(Eixtract.) St. Petersburgh, December 30, 1840. 


IN consequence, I believe, of an accident that occurred to the steam- 
boat between Odessa and Constantinople, the last Mail from that capital 
was sent by land, and only reached this place yesterday; when Count 
Nesselrode learnt the manner in which the Convention entered into by 
Commodore Napier and Mehemet Ali was received by the Divan of the 
Sublime Porte. 

The Russian Government will not despatch any instructions to 
M. Titow thereupon, for fear of adding to the complications and embar- 
rassments in which the final arrangement of the Turco-Egyptian Ques- 
tion has become involved. The Emperor places entire reliance upon the 
British Government in this difficulty. 

Count Nesselrode thinks it unfortunate that the Sultan had not been 
disposed, or advised, to concede the hereditary government of Egypt to 
Mehemet Ali. 


No. 131. 


Count Nesselrode to M. de Titow.—(Communicated by Baron Brunnow, 
January 23, 1841.) 


23 Dec., 1840 
St. Pétersbourg, Fyancs isi 


JE me suis empressé de placer sous les yeux de ’Empereur votre 
expédition du 28 Novembre, par laquelle vous nous avez rendu compte 
des derniers événemens qui viennent de se passer 4 Alexandrie, ainsi que 
de la détermination de la Porte de refuser sa sanction a arrangement 
conclu par le Commodore Napier. 

Hl est certain qu’il n’appartient qu’A Sa Hautesse de déterminer en 
dernier ressort ’étendue des sacrifices qu’il lui convient de faire, pour 
assurer la pacification de son Empire, et ce Souverain ne doit point douter 
que l’Empereur désire sincérement que cette pacification ait lieu aux 
conditions les moins défavorables pour la Porte. 

Mais, plus notre Auguste Maitre a 4 coeur de défendre les intéréts du 
Sultan, et plus aussi Sa Majesté Impériale croirait manquer a l’amitié 
qu'elle lui porte, si elle ne Vengageait sérieusement, dans ce moment 
décisif, 4 envisager avec calme et modération la situation actuelle des 
choses, et 4 se défendre contre des illusions et des espérances qui pour- 
raient ne pas se réaliser en définitif. 


153 


, 


Il y a encore peu de mois, 4 ’époque méme de la signature de la 
Convention de 33; Juillet, que la Porte n’aurait pu se flatter de réduire 
en si peu de tems Méhémet Ali & Pimpuissance a laquelle il se voit 
condamné aujourd’hui, et il est 4 peine permis de douter qu’elle se serait 
empressée naguéres de lui accorder l’hérédité, si, par ces moyens, elle 
avait pu accélérer, dans Vintérét de la paix générale, un arrangement 
définitif. 

Depuis, les opérations militaires des Alliés en Syrie ont été cou- 
ronnées par les succés les plus décisifs. Néanmoins, lorsque la Porte, dans 
unmoment @irritation, s’est déterminée a prononcer la déchéance de Mé- 
hémet Ali, les Puissances n’ont pas hésité 4 exposer leur opinion a cet 
égard, et a faire connaitre les conditions auxquelles il leur semblait que 
le Sultan ne devait pas hésiter a réintégrer le Pacha dans V’administra- 
tion héréditaire de l’Egypte. 

Il est vrai sans doute que la Porte n’a jamais recu jusqu’a présent 
une communication officielle des conseils que les Puissances Alliées 
avaient cru devoir lui adresser, mais la Porte connait parfaitement la 
nature et la tendance des instructions du 15 Octobre, qui ont acquis une 
publicité EKuropéenne: elle est également informée des déterminations 
arrétées le 14 Novembre a Londres, et de la démarche qui a été prescrite 
a Sir R. Stopford, et qui n’avait d’autre but que d’assurer l’effet des 
instructions précédentes. | 

Il serait aujourd’hui impossible aux Quatre Puissances Alliées de 
revenir sur leurs déclarations antérieures. Déja le Cabinet Britan- 
nique n’a pas hésité un instant A se prononcer en faveur des avantages 
qui resultent de la cessation des hostilités entre la Porte et Méhémet Ali; 
mais tout en appréciant le but que s’était proposé le Commodore Napier, 
en prenant sur sa propre responsabilité d’accélérer la soumission du 
Pacha; tout en approuvant l’ensemble des conditions que cet officier lui a 
imposées ; le Cabinet de Londres n’a pas cru dssumer sur lui une garantie 
formelle, relativement au droit Whérédité que le Sultan conférerait a 
Méhémet Ali. 

Nous avons lV’intime conviction que les autres Puissances adhéreront 
avec empressement a cette opinion de l’Angleterre; aucune d’elles ne 
voudra en effet se charger d’une garantie, qui deviendrait aussi onéreuse 
pour ces Puissances, qu’elle serait incompatible avec les droits de souve- 
raineté de Sa Hautesse. 

Il ne nous reste donc qu’a émettre le voeu que les Représentans des Cours 
Alliées & Constantinople soient mis 4 méme de s’acquitter promptement 
des instructions dont ils ont été munis précédemment, en conseillant 4 
la Porte de révoquer la déchéance de Méhémet Ali, et de lui accorder sa 
grace avec la promesse d’hérédité, dans le cas ot il remplirait sans plus 
de retard les autres conditions de sa soumission. Dans cette méme 
hypothése, il appartiendrait a la Porte d’apporter 4 cet acte d’investiture 
les restrictions contenues dans les Articles III., IV., V., et VI., de la 
Convention de Londres, et développées avec beaucoup de sagacité et de 
précision dans une dépéche du Prince de Metternich, adressée en tout 
dernier lieu 4 l’Internonce d’ Autriche. 

Du reste, au milieu de l’incertitude ot nous nous trouvons encore sur 
les mesures que l’Amiral Anglais a prises, ala suite des instructions qui 
lui ont été transmises le 14 Novembre, ainsi que sur les déterminations 
ultérieures que Méhémet Ali aura adoptées en conséquence des nouvelles | 
ouvertures qui lui auront été faites, nous nous trouvons dans limpossi- 
bilité de vous donner des directions plus étendues que celles que vous 
recevez par la présente: au surplus, elles nous semblent assez précises, 
pour ne vous laisser aucun doute sur esprit dans lequel nous désirerions 
voir agir les Quatre Représentans 4 Constantinople, afin d’amener la 
Porte 4 prendre des déterminations sages et modérées, et conformes aux 
conjonctures actuelles. “3 Wi set: fe oy 

Le Cabinet de Londres parait plus que jamais pénétré de urgence 
de seconder, par tous les moyens possibles, la pacification de POrient et 
de faire cesser les doutes que le Divan parait avoir sur les véritables 
intentions des Alliés. Veltillez donc bien, Monsieur, vous associer a Lord 
Ponsonby, pour tenir aux Ministres de la Porte le langage que Lord Pal- 


xX 


154 


merston vient de prescrire 4 l’ Ambassadeur d’Angleterre, et qui, nous n’en 
doutons point, sera également appuyé par les Représentans d’Autriche 
et de Prusse. 

Nous aimons a croire que le Sultan saura apprécier nos conseils 
comme ils méritent de l’étre, et que, pénétrée de importance de rétablir 
un moment plus tot la paix dans toute l’étendue de son Empire, et de- 
prévenir désormais la possibilité d’un nouveau conflit, dont il serait difficile 
de calculer les diverses chances, Sa Hautesse s’empressera de suivre les 
avis bienveillans et désintéressés de ses Alliés, et contribuera ainsi 4 hater 
la fin de la crise actuelle. 

Recevez, Monsieur, l’assurance de ma considération distinguée. 


(Signé) NESSELRODE. 
(Translation. ) 


Sir, St. Petersburgh, y2o?isr- 
I LOST no time in laying before the Emperor your despatch of the 
28th of November, in which you reported to us the late events which 
have taken place at Alexandria, as well as the determination of the 
Porte to refuse its sanction to the arrangement concluded by Commodore 
Napier. 
an certainly belongs to His Highness alone to determine finally the 
extent of the sacrifices which it is expedient for him to make, in order to 
secure the pacification of his Empire, and that Sovereign ought not to 
doubt that the Emperor desires sincerely that that pacification may be 
effected upon conditions as little unfavourable as possible to the Porte. 

But, the more our August Master has at heart the defence of the 
interests of the Sultan, the more would His Imperial Majesty con- 
sider himself as failing in the friendship which he bears to, His Highness, 
if he did not seriously recommend him, at this decisive moment, to 
consider with calmness and moderation the present posture of affairs, and 
to be on his guard against illusions and hopes which in the end may never 
be realized. 

But a few months since, even at the period of the signature of the 
Convention of July 5%, the Porte could not have hoped in so short a time 
to have reduced Mehemet Ali to the powerless state to which he is now 
reduced ; and it is hardly to be doubted, that it would a little while ago 
have granted to him the hereditary succession, if it had been possible 
for it by that means to hasten a definitive arrangement, in the interests 
of general peace. 

The military operations of the Allies in Syria have, since, been 
crowned with the most decided success. Nevertheless, when the Porte 
in a moment of irritation, determined to pronounce the deprivation of 
Mehemet Ali, the Powers did not hesitate to declare their opinion upon 
the subject, and to make known the conditions upon which it appeared to 
them that the Sultan should not hesitate to reinstate the Pasha in the 
hereditary administration of Egypt. 

it is certainly true that the Porte has never hitherto received an 
official communication of the advice which the Allied Powers thought it 
their duty to tender to it, but the Porte is perfectly aware of the nature 
and tendency of the instructions of the 15th of October, which have 
acquired Kuropean publicity ; it is equally acquainted with the measures 
determined upon on the 14th of November in London, and with the step 
which Sir R. Stopford was instructed to take, and the only object of which 
was to secure the execution of the preceding instructions. 

It would now be impossible for the Four Allied Powers to retract 
their former declarations. Already the British Cabinet has not hesitated 
an instant to declare itself in favour of the advantages which result from 
the cessation of hostilities between the Porte and Mehemet Ali; but while 
it fully appreciates the object which Commodore Napier had in view, in 
undertaking upon his own responsibility to hasten the submission of the 
Pasha ; while it fully approves of all the conditions which that officer has 
imposed upon him; the Cabinet of London has not thought fit to take upon 


155 


itself a formal guarantee with respect to the right of hereditary succes- 
sion which the Sultan might confer upon Mehemet Ali. 

_ We are firmly convinced that the other Powers will readily adhere to 
this opinion of England ; not one of them will, in fact, take upon itself a 
guarantee, which would become as burdensome for those Powers, as it 
would be incompatible with His Highness’s rights of Sovereignty. 

It only remains, then, for us to express the wish that the Represen- 
tatives of the Allied Courts at Constantinople may be enabled promptly 
to execute the instructions with which they were formerly furnished, by 
advising the Porte to revoke the deprivation of Mehemet Ali, and to grant 
him pardon with the promise of hereditary succession, in case he should 
fulfil, without further delay, the other conditions of his submission. In 
such a contingency, it would be for the Porte to apply to this act of 
investiture the restrictions contained in Articles III., IV., V., and VI. of 
the Convention of London, and set forth with much judgment and pre- 
cision in a despatch lately addressed by Prince Metternich to the Austrian 
Internuncio. 

In other respects, in the uncertainty in which we still are with regard 
to the steps which the English Admiral may have taken, in pursuance of 
the instructions which were transmitted to him on the 14th of November, 
as well as with regard to the further resolutions which Mehemet Ali may 
have adopted in consequence of the fresh overtures which have been made 
to him, it is impossible for us to give you more detailed instructions than 
those which you receive in this despatch ; moreover, they appear to us to 
be sufficiently precise not to leave you in any doubt as to the spirit in 
which we are desirous that the Four Representatives at Constantinople 
should act, in order to induce the Porte to come to wise and moderate 
decisions, suitable to existing circumstances. 

The Cabinet of London appears to be more than ever impressed with 
the necessity of furthering, by all possible means, the pacification of the 
Kast, and of putting an end to the doubts which the Divan appears to 
entertain with respect to the real intentions of the Allies. Have the good- 
ness then, Sir, to unite with Lord Ponsonby, in holding to the Ministers of 
the Porte the language which Lord Palmerston has lately prescribed to 
the English Ambassador, and which, we have no doubt, will be equally 
supported by the Representatives of Austria and Prussia. 

We are willing to believe that the Sultan will appreciate our advice 
as it deserves to be appreciated, and that, impressed with the import- 
ance of re-establishing peace at the earliest moment throughout the 
whole extent of his Empire, and of preventing henceforward the possibility 
of a fresh conflict, of which it would be difficult to calculate the different 
chances, His Highness will lose no time in following the kind and disinte- 
rested advice of his Allies, and will thus contribute to hasten the solution 
of the present crisis. 

Accept, Sir, the assurance of my distinguished consideration. 


Signed) NESSELRODE. 


No. 132. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewed January 24, 1841.) 


My Lord, Therapia, December 30, 1840. © 

I HAVE the honour to inclose copy of an official Note from the Sub- 
lime Porte, stating the appointment of Commissioners to be sent to Mehe- 
met Ali, and also an application to Admiral Sir Robert Stopford, for his 
aid in removing the Ottoman fleet, if it should be restored by Mehemet 
Ali to the said Commissioners. I forwarded copy of this Note to Admiral 
Sir R. Stopford. 

Beha Ves OLG7, 


(Signed) PONSONBY. 


156 


Inclosure in No. 132. 


Rechid Pasha to Viscount Ponsonby. 


Monsieur l’ Ambassadeur, Sublime Porte, le 27 Décembre, 1840. 


JE me suis empressé de mettre sous les yeux du Sultan le Protocole 
de la Conférence du 20 de ce mois, et j’ai ’ordre d’informer votre Excel- 
lence que Sa Majesté Impériale, voulant constater par un nouvel acte ses 
sentimens de modération, est disposée 4 accepter la soumission de Méhé- 
met Ali, et qu’elle n’attend que l’accomplissement des obligations qui lui 
sont imposées par le Mémorandum de la Conférence de Londres, du 14 
Novembre, pour considérer cette soumission comme accomplie, et pour con- 
firmer Méhémet Ali dans le Pachalic de PEgypte. me 

Dans le but de hater cet accomplissement, et de mieux prouver ainsi 
son désir de s’associer, autant qu’il est en son pouvoir, aux vues de ses 
Augustes Alliés, le Sultan a décidé que Yaver Pacha (l’Amiral Walker) et 
Mazloum Bey se rendront incessamment en Egypte, en qualité de ses Com- 
missaires, pour recevoir la flotte Ottomane, et pour s’assurer de l’évacua- 
tion par les troupes de Méhémet Ali des lieux désignés dans le Mémoran- 
dum du 14 Novembre. 

J’ai l’ordre de prier, en méme tems, votre Excellence de vouloir bien 
inviter M. l’Amiral de Sa Majesté Britannique a assister, aux termes du pa- 
ragraphe 4 de l’Acte Séparé dela Convention du 15 Juillet, a la remise qui 
sera faite de la flotte entre les mains des dits Commissaires. 

Recevez, M. l Ambassadeur, l’assurance de ma haute considération. 


(Signé) RECHID, 
Ministre des Affaires Etrangéres. 


(Translation.) 


The Sublime Porte, 
Monsieur |’ Ambassador, December 27, 1840. 


I HAVE lost no time in laying before the Sultan the Protocol of the 
Conference of the 20th of this month; and I am commanded to acquaint 
your Excellency, that His Imperial Majesty, wishing to prove by a fresh 
act the moderation of his sentiments, is disposed to accept the submission 
of Mehemet Ali, and only awaits the fulfilment of the conditions imposed 
upon him by the Memorandum of the 14th of November, to consider that 
Ses a as complete, and to confirm Mehemet Ali in the Pashalic of 

Sypt. 

With the view of hastening that fulfilment, and of thus proving more 
clearly his desire to lend himself, as far as is in his power, to the views of 
his august Allies, the Sultan has decided that Yaver Pasha (Admiral 
Walker) and Mazloum Bey shall proceed immediately to Egypt as his 
Commissioners to receive the Ottoman fleet, and to ascertain that the 
places described in the Memorandum of the 14th of November are evacuated 
by the troops of Mehemet Ali. 

[am commanded at the same time to request your Excellency will 
have the goodness to instruct Her Britannic Majesty’s Admiral to assist 
according to the 4th paragraph of the Separate Act of the Convention of 
the 15th of J uly, at the restoration of the fleet to the said Commissioners. 

Receive, &c., 
(Signed) RECHID, 
Minister for Foreign Affairs. 


157 


., No. 133. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received January 24, 1841.) 


My Lord, Therapia, December 30, 1840. 

I HAVE the honour to inclose a correspondence between this Em- 

bassy and Captain Fanshawe, and I have the honour to report that Cap- 

tain Fanshawe left Constantinople yesterday for Marmorice, and was the 

bearer to Admiral Sir Robert Stopford of a copy of the official Note 
inclosed in my preceding despatch. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 133. 
Mr. Doyle to Captain Fanshawe. 


Sir, Therapia, December 26, 1840. 
I AM desired by Lord Ponsonby to inform you, that he has this 
evening received from the Ottoman Minister a message, asking him 
whether or not Commissioners, who are about to be sent by the Sublime 
Porte to Alexandria, can have a passage in the “ Stromboli” to that port. 
I am desired further to say, that the Ottoman Ministry wish for an 
‘answer to the above inquiry tomorrow morning, and that Lord Ponsonby 
hopes it may be convenient to you to send a reply at an early hour to the 
house of Mr. Frederick Pisani in Pera, so that it may be forwarded to 
‘Therapia without delay. The Minister has not told Lord Ponsonby on 
what day the Porte will be ready to despatch the Commissioners, but it is 
to be supposed it will be very soon. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) PERCY W. DOYLE. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 133. 
Captain Fanshawe to Mr. Doyle. 


Her Majesty’s Ship “ Stromboli,” 
Sir, Constantinople, December 27, 1840, 9 a.m. 

IN reply to the letter which I have just received from you, I have to 
request that you will acquaint his Excellency Lord Ponsonby, that Her 
Majesty’s steam-vessel “ Stromboli” not being fitted for the conveyance 
of passengers, and therefore without spare cabins, and as I do not know 
the rank or number of the Commissioners whom the Sublime Porte is 
desirous of sending to Alexandria, or the length of time they may be 
required to remain on board of her there in quarantine, [am unable to 
say that they would have such accommodation as they may desire, 
though, of course, if his Excellency makes the requisition for their 
passage, specifying the rank and number of the persons going, I will give 
Captain Williams directions to prepare the best accommodation he can 
for them. ; 

I beg also to state that my orders are to rejoin the Admiral Com- 
mander-in-Chief at Marmorice, in my way back to Alexandria, should my 
return thither be required. : 

Iam, &c., 
(Signed) ARTHUR FANSHAWE. 


158 


Inclosure 3 in No. 133. 
Mr. Doyle to Captain Fanshawe. 


Sir, | Therapia, December 27, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of this 
day’s date, which I have communicated to his Excellency Lord Ponsonby, 
who begs me to say that it is not in his power to give you the information 
you require, but that he has forwarded your letter to the Ottoman 
Minister, and will make you acquainted with the reply as soon as 
possible. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PERCY W. DOYLE. 


Inclosure 4 in No. 133. 


Mr. Doyle to Captain Fanshawe. 


Sir, Therapia, December 28, 1840. 


I AM desired by Lord Ponsonby to acquaint you that he has this 
moment received an official communication from the Ottoman Minister, 
saying, that in consequence of the difficulty there would be in arranging 
the conveyance of the Ottoman Commissioners in Her Majesty’s steam- 
vessel “Stromboli” to Alexandria, the Porte has ordered a Turkish 
steamer for that purpose. 

The Minister has expressed in the name of the Porte the obligation 
felt for the friendly disposition of Her Majesty’s Government as it is 
manifested in the assistance that has been afforded on this occasion. 

I am further directed by Lord Ponsonby to say, that the Sublime 
Porte having decided upon adopting the above-mentioned mode of acting, 
he is not aware of anything within his competency, which can be the 
cause of your detention here. Lord Ponsonby will take the liberty of 
sending you a letter for the Admiral. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PERCY W. DOYLE. 


Inclosure 5 in No. 133. 
M. F. Pisani to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, | Péra, le 28 Décembre, 1840. 
J’AI Vhonneur d’informer votre Excellence que j’ai communiqué a 
M. le Ministre des Affaires Etrangéres la lettre de M. le Capitaine Fan- 
shawe 4 M. Doyle, en date d’hier; et que M. le Ministre m’a chargé de 
faire savoir 4 votre Excellence, que comme il voit par la lettre de M. le 
Capitaine quwil y a des difficultés pour le passage des Commissaires 
Ottomans sur le “ Stromboli” pour Alexandrie, la Porte les y enverra sur 
un bateau a vapeur de la Marine Impériale Turque. 
Je suis, &c., 
(Signé) F. PISANI. 


Translation.) 


My Lord, Pera, December 28, 1841. 

i HAVE the honour to inform your Excellency that I have communi- 
cated to the Minister for Foreign Affairs Captain Fanshawe’s letter of 
yesterday to Mr. Doyle; and that the Minister has directed me to inform 


159 


your Excellency, that as he perceives from Captain Fanshawe’s letter that 
there is a difficulty in affording to the Ottoman Commissioners a passage 
to Alexandria in the “Stromboli,” the Porte will send them in a steam- 
vessel of the Imperial Turkish navy. | 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) F. PISANI. 


ee at dd ae te we 1) |” 
No. 134. 


Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, January 26, 1841. 


1 TRANSMIT to your Excellency a copy* of a despatch from Her 
Majesty’s Ambssador at Vienna, respecting the instructions about to be 
given by Prince Metternich to the Internuncio on the Eastern Question. 
I take for granted that the steps mentioned in my despatch of the 17th 
of December, have long since been carried into effect. 

With reference, however, to the Protocol of the Conference held be- 
tween your Excellency and your Colleagues and Rechid Pasha, on the 20th 
of December, of which a copy was inclosed in your despatch of the 16th 
instant, I have to state to your Excellency that I cannot disapprove of your 
having declined to take upon yourself the responsibility of declaring that 
Mehemet Ali’s letter to the Grand Vizier, brought by Captain Fanshawe, 
unaccompanied by any acts of fulfilment, should be deemed and accepted 
as acomplete submission; but the advice prescribed by my instructions 
to your Excellency of the 15th of October might have been given; with a 
recommendation, not that such advice should be immediately acted upon, 
but that it should be carried into execution by the Porte, as soon as the 
good faith of Mehemet Ali’s submission shall have been proved by facts. 

Iam, &c. 


(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 135. 
Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received January 25.) 


My Lord, Vienna, January 17, 1841. 


THE Internuncio’s despatches of the 30th ultimo from Constan- 
tinople, brought intelligence that the Commissioners destined for Alex- 
andria would not be empowered to give any assurance as to the right of 
hereditary succession in Mehemet Ali’s family, and that their arrival at 
that port would be delayed as much as possible, in order to give time 
for military operations against Ibrahim Pasha and for insurrections in 
Egypt. 
oue consequence of this intelligence, Prince Metternich sent despatches 
to Prince Esterhazy, by which he announces that Austria remains firm to 
her pledge of obtaining the grant of hereditary succession for Mehemet 
Ali, and that a refusal on the part of the Porte to grant it, would cause 
this country to withdraw its moral and material support from the Sultan;. 
adding, that after the submission of Mehemet Ali, there could be no 
further ground for attacking Ibrahim Pasha; that the only possible 
question with regard to his force would be as to the mode of withdrawing 
it from Syria; and that any attack upon him, or any insurrection in 
Egypt, would be disapproved and disavowed by Austria. 

Copies of these despatches will be forwarded this day to the Inter- 
nuncio to serve for his guidance. Admiral Bandeira has long since been 
instructed to take no part in any attack upon the coast of Egypt, and by 
this occasion he will be further directed to decline giving assistance to 
operations against Ibrahim Pasha. 

I have, &c., 


(Signed) BEAUVALE. 


aaa 
* See No. 137. 


160 


No. 136. 
Lord Beawvale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received January 25.) 


(Extract.) Vienna, January 17, 1841. 


DESPATCHES received yesterday have led Prince Metternich to 
think that the British Government has not employed the means in its 
power to induce the Porte to grant hereditary succession to the family of 
Mehemet Ali, but has abstained from doing so, in the hope that events 
might arise which would render such a measure unnecessary. 


a 
No. 137. 


Lord Beawvale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received January 25.) 


My Lord, Vienna, January 17, 1841. 


PRINCE METTERNICH has just shown me a draft of a despatch 
to the Internuncio, in which, after recapitulating the substance of the des- 
patches sent by Prince Nicholas Esterhazy, he directs him to call his Col- 
leagues together, and making them acquainted with the resolutions of the 
Austrian Cabinet, to call upon them to concur in steps calculated to give 
effect to the decisions taken in the centre of London, and stated in your 
Lordship’s despatch of 17th December last, to Lord Ponsonby. : 

If it should be impossible to induce all the Representatives to act in 
common, the Internuncio is directed, in that case, to state to the Divan the 
determination of Austria; leaving it open to such of the other Ministers 
as may think fit, to make similar declarations. I have good reason to think 
that the Russian and Prussian Ministers will act with the Internuncio. 
The Prince is employed in drawing up a further instruction to the Inter- 
nuncio which he has promised to show me, but I shall not detain Lord 
Napier for the purpose of giving an account of it. I expect it to contain 
instructions as to the representations to be made to the Divan. I shall not 
fail to acquaint Lord Ponsonby, by the Austrian courier, with what is 
passing. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) BEAUVALE. 


No. 138. 


Viscount Palmerston to Lord Beauvale. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, January 26, 1841. 


YOUR Excellency’s despatches to the 17th instant, have been received 
and laid before the Queen. 

With reference to your Excellency’s despatch of the 17th instant, 
stating that the Internuncio’s despatches of the 30th ultimo had 
brought intelligence that the Commissioners destined for Alexandria 
would not be empowered to give any assurance as to the right of heredi- 
tary succession in Mehemet Ali’s family, and that their arrival at that port 
would be delayed as much as possible, I have to inform your Excellency 
that Her Majesty’s Government do not know what instructions or autho- 
rity the Porte has given to the Commissioners whom it has sent to Alex- 
andria; but the Austrian Government has been entirely misinformed as to 
the delay which it supposes the Porte to intend to practise in regard to 
sending those Commissioners. For, in the first place, the Porte applied on 
the 26th ultimo, through Lord Ponsonby, to Captain Fanshawe, for an im- 
mediate passage for those Commissioners in Her Majesty’s steam-vessel 
“Stromboli,” and it was only because Captain Fanshawe stated that he 
had no means of accommodating them, and that he was obliged to go in the 


16] 


first instance to Marmorice Bay, that the Commissioners did not at once 
proceed in the “Stromboli.” But the’Porte, upon considering the state- 
ment made by Captain Fanshawe, determined to send them in a vessel 
of its own; and so little foundation is there for the assertion made to your 
Excellency by the Austrian Government, that the Porte would delay as 
much as possible the arrival of the Commissioners at Alexandria, that I 
have this morning seen a letter from Sir Robert Stopford to Lord Minto, 
dated Marmorice Bay, the 13th of January, being four days antecedent 
to the date of your Excellency’s despatch, in which Sir Robert Stopford 
states that the Turkish Commissioners had already at that time arrived at 
Marmorice, and had left it again for Alexandria, and Sir Robert added 
that he had sent Commodore Napier with them to Alexandria, to super- 
intend the arrangements for the restoration of the Turkish fleet. 

Prince Metternich must therefore have been strangely misinformed 
upon these matters. 

With respect to the orders given to the Austrian frigates at Marmo- 
rice Bay, not to take any part in any attack upon Egypt, and not to aid 
any operations against Ibrahim Pasha, I have to observe, first, that it has 
long been well explained by me to Prince Esterhazy, and of course through 
him to Prince Metternich, that if Her Majesty’s Government should at 
any time think that the course of events rendered it expedient that Her 
Majesty’s Squadron should attack Alexandria, such a measure would, in 
the first instance, in conformity with the engagements contracted by each 
of the Four Powers by the Convention of the 15th of July, be submitted to 
the consideration of the Conference at London; and secondly, that as the 
army of [brahim was, when last heard of, at Damascus, and about to re- 
treat to Egypt by the inland road through the Desert, it could not be very 
probable that the assistance of the Austrian frigates could be asked for 
in support of any attack which the Turkish army of Syria might make 
upon the retreating forces of the Egyptians. 

Iam, &c., 


(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 139. 


Viscount Palmerston to Lord Beauvale. 


(Extract.) Foreign Office, January 26, 1841. 


I HAVE received your Excellency’s despatch of the 17th instant, 
stating that despatches received at Vienna on the 16th of January, have 
led Prince Metternich to think that the British Government has not 
employed the means in its power to induce the Porte to grant hereditary 
tenure in Egypt to Mehemet Ali, but has abstained from doing so; and I 
have to observe, that the belief of Prince Metternich in this matter is 
entirely erroneous. 

For what has in this respect been the course pursued by the Two 
Governments ? | 

The British Government sent of its own accord to Lord Ponsonby 
the instruction of the 15th of October, and invited the other Three 
Courts to send similar instructions to their Representatives at Constan- 
tinople. 

Tif that invitation had been complied with, the whole matter would, 
in all probability, have long since been settled. But the Austrian Govern- 
ment took its stand upon a point of étiquette, or, as it represented it, 
upon an observance of the monarchical principle ; and that Government, 
deeming it unfitting and inexpedient that the Sultan should make another 
proposition to his subject in the manner contemplated by the instruc- 
tion of the 15th of October, suggested a different course of proceeding, 
and declined. to give to the Internuncio instructions corresponding with 
those of tlfe 15th of October to Lord Ponsonby. Thus, on that occasion, 
it was Austria, and not England, priich abstained from using the means 


162 


in its power to persuade the Porte to grant hereditary tenure to Mehemet. 
Ali. 

The British Government, anxious to adopt, whenever it properly can, 
the views of Austria, consented, at the suggestion of Prince Metternich, 
to suspend the execution of the instruction of the 15th of October, and 
sent, on the 14th of November, a different instruction to Sir Robert Stop- 
ford, which instruction was founded upon a Memorandum drawn up in 
the Conference; the instruction itself having been fully considered in Con- 
ference, and several alterations having been made in it at the suggestion 
of the Representatives of the Three Powers. 

But Lord Ponsonby was still instructed, that whenever the Porte 
should receive from Mehemet Ali the submission required by the instruc- 
tion of the 14th of November, he was to give to the Porte, in concert 
with his Colleagues at Constantinople, the advice prescribed by the 
instruction of the 15th of October. 

Now, it appears by the Protocol of the Conference held at Constan- 
tinople, on the 20th of December, between Rechid Pasha and the Repre- 
sentatives of the Four Powers, that Lord Ponsonby formally declared on 
that day in Conference, that he had positive orders from his Government to 
give to the Porte advice to grant hereditary tenure to Mehemet Ali, the 
moment the Porte should state that it was satisfied with Mehemet Ali’s 
submission. But Lord Ponsonby properly, as it appears to me, declined 
to take upon himself the responsibility of deciding whether the submis- 
sion of Mehemet Ali was satisfactory and complete or not. 

But what, on that occasion, was the course pursued by the Inter- 
nuncio with respect to the fulness of the submission? He was first of 
opinion that it was complete, and then of opinion that it was not com- 
plete, but only a beginning of submission. But with regard to the advice 
to be given to the Porte in the event of the submission being to be con- 
sidered complete, what did he say? Why, first he read a paper which he 
had previously prepared, in order that his meaning might be perfectly “ 
clear and distinct, and that he might express “toute la pensée” of his 
Government, and in that paper he distinctly confined himself to recom- 
mending the “ re-installation ’’ of Mehemet Ali in his Pashalic of Egypt, 
without saying one word about hereditary right; and then, afterwards, 
when Lord Ponsonby stated that he for his part had positive orders to 
advise the grant of hereditary tenure, the Internuncio distinctly stated 
that he had no precise instructions on that point, though he added that 
he would, in virtue of his general instructions, take upon himself to follow 
the example, in this respect, of the British Ambassador. Thus, then, it 
appears that the Austrian Government having in October declined, upon 
a ground of form, to give to the Internuncio the same instructions which 
Her Majesty’s Government had given to Lord Ponsonby upon the ques- 
tion of hereditary tenure, had, though within ten days’ reach of Constan- 
tinople, left the Internuncio, up to the 20th of December, without any 
precise instructions for his guidance on this point; and then the Austrian 
Government, throwing upon the British Government and British agents 
the blame which belongs wholly to other persons, charges Her Majesty’s 
Government with having purposely abstained from doing that which 
the Protocol of the 20th of December proves, that the British Govern- 
ment alone out of all the Four had fully and completely done. 


No. 140. 
Viscount Palmerston to Lord Beauvale. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, January 26, 1841. 
WITH reference to my first despatch of this day’s date, I have to 
inform your Excellency that the Ottoman Commissioners arrived at 
: Marmorice on the 8th instant, and that they immediately proceeded to 
Alexandria. 
Iam, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


sss NSS 


163 


No. 141. 


Viscount Palmerston to Lord Beauvale. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, January 30, 1841. 


WITH reference to your Excellency’s despatch of the 3rd instant, 
reporting that you had been requested by Prince Metternich to 
state to me, that if the Porte should hesitate to accede to the recommen- 
dation of the Allied Powers, to confer the hereditary government of 
Egypt upon Mehemet Ali, the Austrian Court does not admit that the 
Allies can allow themselves to be committed by such hesitation; I have to 
instruct your Excellency to state to Prince Metternich, that it seems 
probable that when that recommendation shall have been given by the 
Representatives of the Four Powers, the Porte will accede to it; but that, 
at the date of the last despatches which have been here received from 
Constantinople, it did not appear that the Austrian, Prussian, and 
Russian Representatives had received from their Courts instructions to 
the same effect as those which had been long since sent upon this point 
to the British Ambassador. 

I am, &c., 


(Signed) | PALMERSTON. 


No. 142. 


Sir John Barrow to J. Backhouse, Esq. 


Sir, . Admiralty, January 26, 1841. 


I AM commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to 
transmit to you inclosed copy of a letter from Admiral the Honourable Sir 
Robert Stopford, Commander-in-Chief in the Mediterranean, with its inclo- 
sures from Captain Stewart and General Michell, from which it will appear 
that Ibrahim Pasha is on his retreat from Damascus by the Mecca 
road; and I am to request that you will lay the same before Viscount 
‘Palmerston. 

Iam, &c. 


(Signed) J. BARROW. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 142. 


Admiral Sir Robert Stopford to R. More O’Ferrall, Esq. 


‘¢ Princess Charlotte,” 
Sir, Marmorice, January 13, 1841. 


WITH reference to my letter of yesterday’s date I have to acquaint 
you, that the “Gorgon” has arrived and brought the inclosed despatches 
from Captain Stewart and General Michell, from which it will appear 
that Ibrahim Pasha is on his retreat from Damascus by the Mecca road, to 
which it seems to have been their object to keep him. My orders to Commo- 
dore Sir Charles Napier may by this time have been the means of facilitating 
his retreat; but on this and the state of affairs at Alexandria, | shall take the 
earliest means of communicating as soon as I receive my despatches. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) ROBERT STOPFORD, 
Admiral. 


s 


ee eee ee, ees ee eee eee Tee eer Ar ce Fee 
‘ % : x : r. pr 


164 


Inclosure 2 in No. 142. 


Captain H. Stewart to Admiral Sir Robert Stopford. 


British Head- Quarters, 
Sir, Jaffa, January 10, 1840. 


BY the arrival of the “Gorgon” here last night, I have received your 
letters of the 5th and 6th instant. In pursuance of the intention stated to you 
in my letter of the 2nd instant, I joined Brigadier-General Michell at Acre. 
We remained there till the 6th, when, in consequence of communications from 
General Jochmus, the greater part of the Turkish troops prepared to advance 
on this place, and General Michell prepared to precede them here by steam, 
taking with him 100 marines under Captain Leonard, Colonel Colquhoun and 
his party of artillerymen with their guns; at the same time General Michell 
requested me to send orders for the ‘‘Magicienne” to embark Lieutenant- 
Colonel Higgins and the remainder of the British force at Beyrout, and to 
bring them to Acre, leaving instructions there for them to come on here, or 
remain there, as intelligence might render advisable. We reached this in the 
‘Vesuvius ” and “ Hecate,” (the ‘ Dido” following,) on the 6th at sunset; 
and Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson, R.E. was immediately sent out to Ramla, 
(three hours distant from this place,) to communicate with Omar Pasha, who 


-was there with a force of 2,500 men, (considerable bodies of Irregular Cavalry 


being ready to aid him,) intending to menace Gaza. 

Omar Pasha was induced to delay his advance upon that place, until he 
had seen General Michell and myself: and the next day he came on here, 
when it was agreed to defer his offensive operations on Gaza until the arrival 
of the Seraskier from Acre, and intelligence from General Jochmus. The 
latter General reached this from Jerusalem yesterday morning early ; and we 
find that he has given such orders as will complete a line of twenty-eight 
battalions betwixt this place and Jerusalem, and that all will be in position by 
sunset this evening. The chief object of this advance seems to be to induce 
Ibrahim Pasha to retire by the Desert, and not by the coast. We have been 
somewhat in doubt and suspense as to which road he would retire by; but 
news reached the Seraskier last night, which is believed to be authentic, stating, 
that Ibrahim Pasha’s vanguard was already thirteen hours’ march to the south- 
east of El-Mezerib, and that, consequently, there was no longer any doubt of 
his taking the Desert route. 

There is still a force of above 3,000 men, chiefly Cavalry, close to Gaza, 
but it is believed they will very shortly retire. The troops at El-Arish are 
said to be very few. ‘The Turkish troops, which the Seraskier left at Antioch, 
Tripoh, &c., are advancing on Damascus, and very shortly the whole of the 
Ottoman force will be in a situation to advance south as Ibrahim retreats. It 
is very difficult to get information, and still more so to know how much to 
believe ; but my own opinion and (what is of much more importance) General 
Michell’s opinion is, that Ibrahim is positively evacuating Syria. It will be 
necessary to make certain of this before we are quite at ease about Acre; and 
I shall, therefore, keep the “Vesuvius” and “ Hecate” here until we are so. So 
soon as that is the case, I will send ‘‘ Vesuvius”? to take invalid marines and 
“Zebra's”? men as you direct; and in the mean time shall desire the “Dido ” to 
go off to Kaiffa, and embark as many of the “ Zebra's”? men as she can conve- 
niently ; and should there be no apprehension entertained at Acre, the “Dido ” 
will proceed to join you at Marmorice. This place appears to be airy and 
healthy, and the men have got very wholesome quarters: on that and other 
considerations, I think the General will probably retain his head-quarters 
here for the present ; so soon as he is quite at ease I shall return to Beyrout, 
leaving, if possible, the “ Hecate ” here, should he request it. We have had 
most beautiful weather; but I have recommended to all the Captains and 
Commanders to put to sea the moment it threatens to blow, (the sailing ships 
keeping their courses and topsails reefed, and anchored with a good offing,) and 
to return when moderate. 

_It has been reported that Ibrahim retires only with his Egyptians, all the 
Syrians having either left him or been discharged. He has been throwing out 
very strong foraging parties from El-Mezerib to considerable distance, which 


165 


have terrified the inhabitants and kept us somewhat uneasy, making the acqui- 
sition of correct intelligence still more difficult. 

I write in very great haste, as the “ Gorgon” must leave this by 11 a.M., 
to insure her reaching your flag on the 13th. The “Gorgon” takes up Dr. 
Niddy and Lieutenant Sand, R.M., who were apparently at the last extremity 
at Acre, and saved by Captain Davies kindly agreeing to receive them on board 
the <‘* Dido,” till an opportunity offered for Beyrout or Marmorice. I am 
happy to say, that there is a most decided improvement in the health of the 
marines at Acre, since the establishment of the Convalescent Hospital at 
Abdallah’s Palace. It is the General’s intention, should he remain here, to 
have the whole effective force down here; and I shall send all men not strong to 
Marmorice. Mr. Robertson, Assistant-Surgeon of ‘* Benbow,” is moving here 
with the head-quarters by General Michell’s desire; and we brought down the 
Assistant-Surgeon of the “ Zebra” to take charge until Mr. Robertson’s 
arrival. 

The “ Magicienne” arrived off this place yesterday evening ; but Colonel 
Higgins, his guns and stores, remain on board until we gain perfect information 
of Ibrahim’s retreat, in case it should be advisable to reinforce Acre, which 
we do not think likely. 

The “Hazard” is at Sidon with discretionary power to move to Tyre, 
should he think Sidon an unsafe anchorage. 

General Michell and I are both determined to confine ourselves strictly to 
precautionary and defensive measures; and we shall use every endeavour to 
prevail upon our Allies to do the same, and not to obstruct, but rather to 
facilitate, Ibrahim’s retreat. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Colquhoun being withdrawn from Acre, the General 
would be very glad that another Field-Officer was sent to command there. 
The Deputy Commissary-General has not yet arrived here, and consequently 
no demand for money from Malta can be forwarded; but I shall speak to him 
on the subject immediately he comes. Captain Henderson will speak to you, 
by the General’s desire, as to the possibility of its being sent up by your orders 
without delay, as it is much wanted. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) HOUSTON STEWART, 
Captain. 


Inclosure 3 in No. 142. 


Brigadier-General Michell to Admiral Sir Robert Stopford. 


My Dear Sir, Jaffa, January 10, 1841. 


I HAVE to acknowledge the receipt, by the “ Gorgon” steamer, late last 
evening, of your communications, public and private, of the 6th of January, 
together with despatches from London and from Constantinople. It being 
necessary for the steamer to return to you at Marmorice by the 13th, and 
therefore to start this morning, there is only time to send, for the purpose you 
mention, a brief abstract of the military events in Syria up to the present day. 
My last despatches to Viscount Palmerston and to Viscount Ponsonby are of 
31st December and Ist January; and you are already acquainted with the 
contents of them by means of my letters and those of Captain Houston 
Stewart. Ai 

It will be impossible now to prepare any additional official statements. I 
must therefore, my dear Sir, beg of you to convey to their Lordships, with my 
apologies, the substance of the inclosed Memorandum. . 

It is principally a compendium of General Jochmus's reports and 
observations. Soliciting your indulgence for the haste and imperfection of 
my notes, 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) EDWARD MICHELL, 


166 


P.S.—From the reports of my own staff-officers near the Jordan, I am 
led to believe that the Egyptian loss upon the march has not been so grea as 
has been reported to General Jochmus. 


Inclosure 4 in No. 142. 


Memorandum as to Military Events in Syria. 
December 21 to December 30, 1840.—ORGANISATION of the levee en 


‘masse of the whole of Syria south of Beyrout and of Damascus. The moun- 
taineers under arms calculated at 15,000 men, including the Haouran. 

December 27, 1840.—El-Mezerib, an advanced post one day’s march 
south of Damascus, abandoned by the Egyptians, and the stores and forage 
which Ibrahim Pasha had collected there for his retreat by Palestine and Gaza 
into Egypt, taken by the mountaineers. 

December 29, 1840.—Ibrahim Pasha evacuates Damascus ; 2,000 Koordish 
Cavalry desert, besides numerous bodies of Artillery and of Irregular Infantry. 

December 30, 1840, to January 2, 1841.—Ibrahim Pasha retires through 
El-Kissoria, and again occupies El-Mezerib; pursued by 2,000 Light Horse 
under Captain de I’Or, Aide-de-camp to General Jochmus, and experienced 
heavy losses by desertion, by the sword, and by the severity of the weather. 

January 3, 4, 1841.—Ibrahim remains at El-Mezerib to organize his 
troops and convoys. His plan of moving across the Jordan, through Palestine 
by Djounie and Ramla, to the coast, frustrated by the Emir Bechir arriving with 
7,000 men, 1,500 Light Horse, at Tabaria ; and by the defiles of Djounie being 
occupied by the mountaineers of Naplouse, whilst the regular army of twenty- 
eight battalions occupies, by a march along the sea-shore, a line from Sidon to 
Mount Carmel, Jerusalem being also garrisoned. 

January 5, 1841.—Ibrahim begins his march into the Desert by the 
Caravan-road, towards Maan and Suez; his force apparently reduced to 
15,000 Infantry, 5,000 Horse, and a park of Artillery of upwards of 100 
pieces. He was said before to have 217 guns. He has besides immense con- 
voys, with women, servants, baggage, &c., &c. The son of the Governor of 
Jerusalem with Baron Dumont, Aide-de-camp to General Jochmus, sent to 
raise the Bedouins of Gebel Chalil, (Mount Hebron,) and those of the Desert, 
for the purpose of destroying the forage and provisions at Maan, eight days’ 
march into the Desert. 

English staff officers moving with the Mountain Levies of Lebanon, of 
Naplouse, of Ageloun, and with detached corps of Albanians, &c.; others sta- 
tioned at Sidon, Tyre, Acre, Jerusalem, Ramla. 

The losses of Ibrahim Pasha in killed, prisoners, and deserters have been 
estimated at 10,000 or 15,000 men up to the period of his leaving El-Mezerib, 
but correct accounts have not yet been obtained. 

A Cavalry camp of 3,000 Egyptians, sent by Mehemet Ali from El-Arish, 
is still established south of Gaza; but these troops are likely to retire when 
re hear that Ibrahim marches into the Desert, and not through Palestine or 

aza, 


_ [The above is extracted principally from the reports and obser- 
vations of General Jochmus. | 


December 29 to 31, 1840.—British head-quarters transferred from Beyrout 
to Acre. 


January 6, 7, 1841.—British head-quarters moved from Acre and esta- 
blished at Jaffa. 


January 9, 1841.—The new Seraskier Zecharia Pasha, General-in-Chief of 
the Turkish forces, arrives at Jaffa. General Jochmus also comes to Jaffa from 
the Jordan and from Jerusalem. 


Principal points occupied by the Turkish regular forces :—Acre, Jerusalem, 
Defiles of Djounie, Jaffa, and Ramla. 


The troops which crossed the Taurus, or came from the north-east with 


the new Seraskier, moving southwards, partly through Balbec and Ceelo-Syria, 
partly by the coast, through Tripoli and Beyrout, towards Acre. 


(Signed) EDWARD MICHELL, 
Brigadier-General. 


a 


167 


No. 143. 


Str John Barrow to J. Backhouse, Esq. 


Sir, Admiralty, January 26, 1841. 

_ I AMcommanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to trans- 
mit to you the inclosed copy ofa letter from Admiral the Honourable Sir Ro- 
bert Stopford, Commander-in-Chief in the Mediterranean, and of its inclosures, 
containing information respecting the evacuation of Syria by the troops of 
Mehemet Ali, and I have to request that you will lay the same before Viscount 
Palmerston. 


I am, &c., 
(Signed) J. BARROW. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 143. 
Admiral Sir Robert Stopford to R. More O’Ferrall, Esq. 


: ** Princess Charlotte,”’ 
Sir, Marmorice, January 12, 1841. 


IN obedience to their Lordship’s directions, signified in your letter 
of the 15th of December last, to despatch a special steam vessel to Mar- 
seilles, with the latest possible intelligence from the Levant, conformably to 
the wishes of Her Majesty’s Government, I have the honour to acquaint you, 
that immediately on the receipt of your letter of the 6th instant, I despatched 
the “Gorgon” to Acre, in order to obtain such intelligence from Brigadier- 
General Michell, who by my last accounts had proceeded thither from 
Beyrout to watch Ibrahim Pasha’s movements, and on her way back to touch 
at Beyrout, and procure the latest accounts there from Captain Stewart of the 
“ Benbow,” stationed at that place in charge of the coast of Syria; and I now 
hold the “‘Hydra” in readiness to start for Marseilles agreeably to their 
Lordships orders, with the further information expected by the “ Gorgon.” 

Captain Fanshawe having returned from Constantinople on the Ist instant, 
I inclose the reports of his proceedings, and of a letter which I have received 
through Her Majesty’s Ambassador from: the Ottoman Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, calling upon me, in terms of the [Vth Article of the ‘‘ Acte Sépare” 
of the Convention of the 15th of July last, to assist in the delivering up of the 
Turkish fleet, if necessary. J accordingly despatched Commodore Sir Charles 
Napier (his Convention having been approved of by Her Majesty’s Govern- 
ment with some exceptions) to Alexandria on the 6th instant, in the “Strom- 
boli,” to await the arrival of the Commissioners, with instructions to give every 
facility in communicating Mehemet Ali’s orders for the recall of Ibrahim and 
the evacuation of Syria, agreeably to a requisition from the former to that 
effect: and this I did in order to give all possible countenance to a satisfactory 
settlement of this long-agitated question, as well as to remove any pretence that 
might be raised against it. 

The Ottoman Commissioners arrived here on the 8th, and proceeded on 
immediately to Alexandria with a letter from me to Commodore Napier, of 
which I inclose a copy. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) ROBERT STOPFORD, 
Admiral. 


Se 


-_-- Te) ee a 1 is . a a eee re TC ey Te ae ve cae galls hi 


168 


Inclosure 2 in No. 148. 


Captain Fanshawe to Admiral Sir Robert Stopford. 


Her Majesty’s Steam Vessel “Stromboli,” 
Sir, Constantinople, December 18, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to report to you that I arrived at Therapia in this vessel, 
at 1 p.m., onthe 16th instant. I immediately waited upon his Excellency 
Lord Ponsonby, and delivered to him your despatches and the translation of 
Mehemet Ali’s letter to the Vizier, of which I was the bearer. His Lordship 
gave me to understand that the Sublime Porte was disposed not to accept any 
proposals from Mehemet Ali, but that some days might elapse before a decision 
was come to, and that he would inform the Vizier I was arrived with the letter 
from Mehemet Ahi, in order that he might fix a time for receiving me. 

I decided therefore on proceeding to Constantinople in the “ Stromboli,” 
that she might coal and water, and having addressed the letter to Lord Pon- 
sonby, a copy of which I inclose, came down in her to the Golden Horn, yes- 
terday morning. I have this morning had an interview with his Highness the 
Vizier, and presented Mehemet Ah’s letter to him, and also the one for the 
Governor of Candia, and repeated to him what had passed between Mehemet 
Ali and myself, on making known to him the determination of the Allied Powers. 
His Highness having read the letter, expressed a similar opinion, that no terms 
with Mehemet Ali would be acceptable to the Porte, and wished me to wait 
upon Rechid Pacha, the Minister for Foreign Affairs. I told him my duty 
ended with putting Mehemet Als letter into his hands, and that all discussion 
of the question rested with the Ambassador ; but that if the Minister for Foreign 
Affairs expressed a wish to have any communication with me, I should be ready 
at any time to wait upon him. 

I understand a meeting of the Council of State and the Ambassadors of the 
Allied Powers is to take place on the 20th, to discuss the question of Egypt. 

T await here Lord Ponsonby’s directions for my further guidance, and I 


have the honour, &c., 
(Signed) ARTHUR FANSHAWE, 
Captain. 


P.S.—Her Majesty’s ship “Talbot ”’ is at the Arsenal; also a Turkish ship 
of the line, a frigate, and a corvette, two brigs, and two schooners preparing for 
sea; a ship of the line, one brig, and the schooners in a forward state. 

The Austrian steamer of war “ Marianne”? is here, also a Russian 
schooner and steamer of war ; and the French brig “ Fléche” is at Therapia. 


Inclosure 3 in No. 148. 
[See Inclosure 2 in No. 124.] 


Inclosure 4 in No. 143. 
Captain Fanshawe to Admiral Sir Robert Stopford. 


Her Mayesty Steam Vessel “ Stromboli,” 
Sir, off Tenedos, December 30, 1840. 


WITH reference to your orders to me to proceed to Constantinople, and 
to my letter to you of the 18th instant, I have now the honour to acquaint you 
hat [had no communication from his Excellency Lord Ponsonby from that 
date until the 27th, when I received a letter from him, relative to the convey- 
ance of Turkish Commissioners in this vessel to Alexandria; and I bes to 
inclose you copies of the correspondence that in consequence passed between 
his Lordship and myself, through Mr. Doyle, on the subject ; and also to state 
that, in pursuance of the intimation from his Lordship, that he was “not aware 


169 


of anything within his competency ” which could be the cause of my detention 
at Constantinople, and having yesterday afternoon received the accompanying 
despatch from him for you, I quitted the Golden Horn in the “ Stromboli ” 
at 9 P.M. yesterday, and am proceeding in her to rejoin you at Marmorice. 
have, &c., 
(Signed) ARTHUR FANSHAWE, 
Captain. 


Inclosure 5 in No. 143. 


[See Inclosure 1 in No. 133. ] 


Inclosure 6 in No. 143. 
[See Inclosure 2 in No. 133. ] 


Inclosure 7 in No. 143. 
|See Inclosure 3 in No, 133.] 


Inclosure 8 in No. 143. 
[See Inclosure 4 in No. 133.] 


Inclosure 9 in No. 143. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Admiral Sir Robert Stopford. 


Sir, Therapia, December 28, 1840. 


I HAVE the honour to inclose, for your information, copy of a Note [ 
received this evening from the Ottoman Minister for Foreign Affairs, wherein 
his Excellency refers to paragraph 4 of the Separate Article of the Convention 

of the 15th of July, and requests the assistance of Her Majesty’s Naval Forces 
as therein specified. 
IT have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 10 in No. 148. 
Rechid Pasha to Viscount Ponsonby. 


[See Inclosure in No. 132.] 


No. 144. 


Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, January 29, 1841. 


I HAVE to state to your Excellency that Chekib Effendi called on me 
yesterday, to ask my advice as to what he should write to Rechid Pasha upon 
the question of giving to Mehemet Ali hereditary tenure in the Pashalic of 
Egypt,—a grant which, he said, the pee is extremely desirous of not being 


_ <== =~ = — ' eS ae ee ee ae! ee Py eae eet 


170 


pressed to confer. I told him that, undoubtedly, I could not but admit the 
force of the objections which have been urged against this grant, and that it 
would be very much better, both for the interest of the Sultan and for that of 
his Egyptian subjects, if the Sultan could reserve to himself the same unfettered 
discretion in the selection of future Governors of Egypt, which he exercises 
with respect to the choice of Governors for the other provinces of his Empire. 
But I said, that in all affairs one must be content with what is practicable, and 
ought not to endanger what has been obtained by striving after that which is 
unattainable. I said, that it is clear that Mehemet Ali has made his submission 
in the expectation that he should obtain hereditary tenure in Egypt: now if, 
after all, this tenure were to be refused to him, what would probably be the 
consequence ?—renewed revolt, or an attitude, at least, of passive resistance. 
What would then be the remedy? Such a state of things could not be allowed 
to continue, because if it lasted, it would amount to the separation of Egypt 
from the Turkish Empire. But the Sultan has not, at present, naval 
or military means sufficient to enforce his authority, in such a case, over 
Mehemet Ali in Egypt. The Sultan would, therefore, be obliged to have 
recourse for aid to his Allies. But the measures hitherto agreed upon by the 
Four Powers in virtue of the Treaty of July, are confined to the expulsion of 
the Egyptians from Syria, Arabia, and Candia, and to the driving of Mehemet 
Ali’s forces and authorities back within the limits of Egypt. If, then, the 
Sultan were to apply to the Four Powers for assistance to attack Mehemet Ali 
in Egypt itself, a new deliberation of the Conference would become necessary. 

Now, I said to Chekib, I could tell him beforehand what would be the 
result of that deliberation, if the assistance asked for by the Sultan were required 
in consequence of the Sultan’s refusal to comply with the advice given him by 
the Four Powers, to confer upon Mehemet Ali hereditary tenure of his 
Egyptian Pashalic. I said I knew perfectly well that the Four Powers would 
decline giving the Sultan such assistance; and what then would happen? Why, 
the Sultan would, in consequence, find himself, for want of sufficient means of 
his own, obliged to grant to Mehemet Ali with a bad grace, and after an ineffec- 
tual attempt to avoid doing so, that which he might now make a merit of con- 
ferring willingly; and thus, instead of performing, as he now may do, an act of 
Sovereign Power at the suggestion of his Allies, he would appear to all the 
world as making an extorted concession to a subject. 

I said that I would not attempt to represent as being of no value or 
importance a sacrifice which is unquestionably a great one, because such a 
representation could not convince the Sultan. But I begged Chekib Effendi 
to request his Government to consider the immense importance of the 
moral and physical strength which the Sultan has gained by the events of 
the last few months, and to remember that all which the Sultan has gained, 
Mehemet Ali has lost. That thus their relative positions have been so entirely 
changed, that the Pasha can never again become really dangerous or seriously 
troublesome to the Sultan, if the Sultan avails himself properly of the stipula- 
tions of the Treaty of July ; and if he shall well organize his army, navy, and 
finances, and shall place those branches of his public service upon an efficient 
footing. I desired Chekib Effendi to bear in mind that the Sultan has recovered, 
for his direct authority, the whole of Syria, Arabia, and Candia ; points which, 
with reference to military, naval, financial, and religious considerations, are of 
the utmost importance, and for the recovery of which the Sultan would, at this 
time last year, have gladly made very considerable sacrifices. 1 further reminded 
him, that a faithful execution of that stipulation of the Treaty of July, which 
says, that all the laws and treaties of the Empire are to apply to Egypt as to any 
other province, will afford a most essential security for the sovereign authority 
of the Sultan. I therefore requested Chekib Effendi to urge his Government to 
conclude this matter without further delay, because it is of great importance for 
all paste concerned, that it should be brought to a final settlement as soon as 
possible. 

Chekib Effendi promised me to write to Rechid Pasha to this effect, and he 
said that he had no doubt that the Sultan will comply with the advice of his 
Alles, 

Tam, &c., 


, / (Signed) PALMERSTON. 


SS Ss sss SSS SSNS 


171 


No. 145. 


Note from the Plenipotentiaries of Austria, Great Britain, Prussia, and Russia, 
to Chekib Effendi. 


LES Soussignés, Plénipotentiaires des Cours d’Autriche, de la Grande Bre- 
tagne, de Prusse, et de Russie, ont mtirement pris en considération la dépéche* 
de Rechid Pacha en date de Constantinople le 13 Chewal, 1256, (8 Décembre, 
1840,) que son Excellence Chékib Effendi, Ambassadeur de la Sublime Porte, 
arecu ordre de communiquer au Principal Secrétaire d’Etat de Sa Majesté 
Britannique ayant le Département des: Affaires Etrangéres, pour étre portée 
la connaissance des Représentans des Cours signataires de la Convention du 
15 Juillet. 

Cette communication énonce Vhésitation que Sa Hautesse le Sultan 
éprouvait 4 accorder 4 Méhémet Ali le Gouvernement héréditaire du Pachalic 
d’Egypte. 

Les Soussignés, aprés avoir voué 4 l’objet de cette communication l’attention 
la plus sérieuse, ont résolu d’un commun accord d’inviter son Excellence 
Chékib Effendi 4 soumettre, 4 cet égard, 4 la Sublime Porte les considérations 
suivantes. 

Ils se font un devoir de signaler d’abord, qu’a la date de la dépéche sus- 
mentionnée de Réchid Pacha, les Représentans des Quatre Cours ne s’étaient 
pas encore acquittés collectivement auprés de la Sublime Porte de la démarche 
concertée 4 Londres le 15 Octobre. Et il résulte des informations les plus 
récentes recues de Constantinople jusqu’a la date du 27 Décembre, que méme & 
cette époque les Représentans des Quatre Cours ne s’étaient pas encore crus 
appelés a adresser au Ministére de Sa Hautesse les conseils qu’ils étaient chargés 
Coffrir. | 

Dans Vintervalle, les intentions des Cours Alliées sont invariablement restées 
les mémes. Séparées par de longues distances et sans avoir eu besoin de se 
concerter de nouveau, elles ont transmis 4 leurs Représentans 4 Constantinople 
des ordres qui portent le caractére d’une parfaite unanimité. 

Le Gouvernement de Sa Majesté Britannique a adressé a cet effet a son 
Représentant 4 Constantinople des instructions sous la date du 17 Décembre, 
qui servent a confirmer expressément celles du 15 Octobre. 

La Cour de Vienne a transmis 4 ce méme sujet a M. l’Internonce des ordres 
positifs le 29 Décembre dernier. 

Le Cour de Berlin s’est associée en entier aux instructions concertées en 
commun a Londres le 15 Octobre et le 14 Novembre. 

La Cour de Russie a adressé le 23 Décembre a son Chargé d’Affaires 4 
Constantinople des ordres concus exactement dans le méme esprit. 

Les Soussignés, en rapportant ces faits, se permettent de croire que les 
conseils qui auront ainsi été donnés de la part des Représentans des Quatre 
Cours pourront avoir exercé une influence essentielle sur les opinions que Réchid 
Pacha a exposées dans sa dépéche susmentionnée du 8 Décembre, et fait dispa- 
raitre les doutes que ce Ministre avait énoncés sur la marche ultérieure a suivre 
par la Sublime Porte. 

Cependant, pour lever ces doutes, et pour éviter toute perte de tems, les 
Soussignés ont jugé utile de ne pas attendre des rapports ultérieurs de Constan- 
tinople ; et sans différer plus longtems de répondre a la communication de son 
Excellence Chékib Effendi, ils ont cru de leur devoir d’exprimer encore une fois 
3 M. Ambassadeur Ottoman, et de constater par écrit, opinion de leurs Cours 
respectives, telle qu’ils ont eu V’honneur de la lui communiquer déja de vive 
VOIX. 

Cette opinion invite le Sultan 4 user de sa clémence et de sa générosité 
souveraines de maniére non seulement a révoquer |’ Acte de destitution prononcé 
contre Méhémet Ali, mais 4 lui accorder la promesse que ses descendans en 
ligne directe seront nommés successivement par le Sultan au Pachalic d’Egypte, 
chaque fois que ce poste deviendra vacant par la mort du Pacha precedent. 

En conseillant 11a Sublime Porte d’accorder cette faveur 4 Méhémet Ali, 
les Quatre Cours, loin de suggérer 4 Sa Hautesse une idée nouvelle, ne font que 


* See Inclosure 2 in No. 107. 


Z 2 


ee ee a a Oe ne 


172 


lui rappeler les intentions que le Sultan avait spontanément annoncées lui-méme 
dés Vorigine de la crise du Levant, intentions qui ont servi de base 4 la Con- 
vention du 15 Juillet. 

De plus, les Quatre Cours, en adressant 4 la Sublime Porte le conseil que 
la présente communication est destinée 4 lui réitérer, ont la conviction de ne 
lui suggérer ni un arrangement dérogatoire aux droits de souveraineté et a 
Vautorité légitime du Sultan, ni une mesure contraire aux devoirs qu’il appar- 
tient au Pacha d’Egypte de remplir, comme sujet du Sultan nommé par Sa 
Hautesse pour gouverner en son nom une province de l’Empire Ottoman. 

Cette vérité se trouve confirmée non seulement par les Articles 3, 5, et 
6 de l’Acte Séparé annexé & la Convention du 15 Juillet, mais encore par les 
instructions que les Quatre Cours ont adressées 4 leurs Représentans 4 Constan- 
tinople a la suite de la délibération du 15 Octobre. my) 

En effet, par l’Acte susmentionné { 5 il est stipulé que tous les Traités et 
toutes les loix de Empire Ottoman, c’est-d-dire tous les Traités et toutes les 
loix qui sont aujourd’hui ou qui pourront a V’avenir étre en vigueur dans 
Empire Ottoman, s’appliqueront au Pachalic d’Egypte comme a toute autre 
province de Empire. 

Cette condition, que les Quatre Cours regardent comme indispensable, 
constitue 4 leurs yeux l’un des liens les plus solides pour rattacher ? Egypte a 
la Turquie comme une partie intégrante de l’Empire Ottoman. 

Le § 6 du méme Acte porte que les forces de terre et de mer qui pourront 
étre entretenues en Egypte, fesant partie des forces de Empire Ottoman, 
seront toujours considérées comme disponibles pour le service général de l’Etat. 

Finalement, par l’instruction concertée 4 Londres le 15 Octobre, et con- 
firmée par le Mémorandum rédigé le 14 Novembre dernier, il a été formellement 
reconnu, que si Méhémet Ali ou l’un de ses descendans venait a enfreindre les 
conditions auxquelles le Gouvernement héréditaire d’Kgypte lui aurait été confié, 
ce titre serait sujet a étre révoqué. 

Les Soussignés aiment a croire que la compléte mise en vigueur des 
conditions susmentionnées répondrait pleinement aux intentions du Sultan, 
réaliserait tous les voeux des Quatre Cours Alliées, et accomplirait heureusement 
Voeuvre de pacification qui a fait ’objet de leurs engagemens mutuels consacrés 
par la Convention du 15 Juillet. Car, en effet, par ’accomplissement de ces 
conditions, les objets sur lesquels s’est fixée la sollicitude et la prévoyance des 
Hautes Parties Contractantes, se trouveraient atteints. 

Le Sultan serait désormais assuré de l’obéissance et de la soumission de 
son Pacha, Gouverneur d’Egypte; les populations de cette province seraient 
mises a l’abri de l’oppression, dont elles ont eu a souffrir durant ces derniéres 
années par les abus de l’administration locale ; enfin, Méhémet Ali obtiendrait 
pour lui-méme et pour sa famille une position qui assurerait paisiblement son 
avenir, sans toutefois porter la moindre atteinte aux devoirs qu’il aura a remplir 
comme sujet de Sultan. . 

Les Soussignés, en portant ces considérations 4 la connaissance de son 
Excellence Chékib Effendi, le prient de les soumettre sans délai 4 sa Cour, et 
Wengager le Gouvernement de Sa Hautesse & y vouer son attention la plus 
sérieuse. 

{ls ont Phonneur d’offrir en méme tems a M. Ambassadeur de la Sublime 
Porte Ottomane l’assurance renouvelée de leur haute considération. 

(Signé) ESTERHAZY. NEUMANN. 
PALMERSTON. 
BULOW. 


BRUNNOW. 
Londres, le 30 Janvier, 1841. 


(Translation.) 


THE Undersigned, Plenipotentiaries of the Courts of Austria, Great 
Britain, Prussia, and Russia, have attentively considered Rechid Pasha’s despatch, 
dated Constantinople, Chewal 13, 1256, (December 8, 1840,) which his Excel- 
lency Chekib Effendi, Ambassador of the Sublime Porte, received orders to com- 
municate to Her Britannic Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign 
Affairs, in order that it might be brought to the knowledge of the Representatives 
of the Courts who signed the Convention of the 15th of July, 


| 173 


This communication expresses the hesitation which His Highness the Sultan 
felt to grant Mehemet Ali the hereditary Government of the Pashalic of 
Egypt. | 

The Undersigned, after having given to the object of this communication 
the most serious attention, have unanimously determined to invite his Excellency 
Chekib Effendi to lay before the Sublime Porte the following considerations 
in this respect. 

They make it their duty, in the first instance, to point out that at the date of 
Rechid Pasha’s above-mentioned despatch, the Representatives of the Four Courts 
had not yet collectively taken towards the Sublime Porte the step agreed upon in 
London, on the 15th of October. And it appears from the most recent intelli- 
gence received from Constantinople up to the 27th of December, that even at 
that time, the Representatives of the Four Courts had not yet thought them- 
selves called upon to address to the Ministry of His Highness the advice which 
they were commissioned to offer it. 

In the interval, the intentions of the Allied Courts have remained invariably 
the same. Separated from each other by great distances, and without having 
had occasion again to concert together, they have forwarded to their Represen- 
tatives at Constantinople instructions which bear the character of perfect 
unanmnity. 

Her Britannic Majesty's Government addressed to its Representative at Con- 
stantinople, instructions to this effect, dated the 17th of December, which serve 
expressly to confirm those of the 15th of October. 

The Court of Vienna forwarded to the Internuncio, on the 29th of last 
December, positive orders on this same subject. 

The Court of Berlin entirely concurred in the instructions concerted in 
common in London, on the 15th of October, and 14th of November. 

The Court of Russia, on the 23rd of December, addressed to its Chargé 
d’ Affaires at Constantinople, orders conceived exactly in the same sense. 

The Undersigned, in adverting to these circumstances, allow themselves to 
believe that the advice which will thus have been given on the part of the Repre- 
sentatives of the Four Courts, will have exercised an essential influence on the 
opinions which Rechid Pasha has set forth in his above-mentioned despatch of 
the 8th of December, and will have caused to disappear the doubts which that 
Minister had expressed, as to the ulterior course to be followed by the Sublime 
Porte. 

Nevertheless, to remove these doubts, and to avoid all loss of time, the Under- 
signed have deemed it useful not to wait for further reports from Constantinople ; 
and without delaying any longer to reply to the communication of his Excel- 
lency Chekib Effendi, they have considered it their duty to express once again to 
the Ottoman Ambassador, and to record in writing, the opinion of their respec- 
tive Courts, such as they have already had the honour verbally to communicate it 
to him. 

This opinion invites the Sultan to manifest his Sovereign clemency and gene- 
rosity so as not only to revoke the Act of deprivation pronounced against Mehemet 
Ali, but also to promise him that his descendants in the direct line shall be 
successively named by the Sultan to the Pashalic of Egypt, every time that that 
post shall become vacant by the death of the preceding Pasha. 

In counselling the Sublime Porte to grant this favour to Mehemet Ali, the 
Four Courts, far from suggesting to His Highness a new idea, only remind him 
of the intentions which the Sultan had himself spontaneously announced from the 
commencement of the crisis of the Levant,—intentions which have served for a 
basis to the Convention of the 15th of July. 

Moreover, the Four Courts, in addressing to the Sublime Porte the advice 
which the present communication is designed to repeat to it, are persuaded that 
they do not suggest to it either an arrangement derogatory to the rights of 
sovereignty and to the legitimate authority of the Sultan, or a measure contrary 
to the duties which it belongs to the Pasha to discharge, as a subject of the Sul- 
tan, appointed by His Highness to govern in his name a province of the Ottoman 
Empire. : 

This truth is confirmed not only by the I[Ird, Vth, and Vith Articles of the 
Separate Act annexed to the Convention of July 15, but also by the instructions 
which the Four Powers addressed to their Representatives at Constantinople, in 
consequence of the deliberation of the 15th of October. 


ee ee a ny ME nein on Sasr On ewe wRTN ser Wn Ne ig Se ee ats eareaes 
. 7 » he ee aa 


In fact, by the fifth paragraph of the above-mentioned Act, it is stipulated 
that all the Treaties and all the Laws of the Ottoman Empire, that is to say, all 
the Treaties and all the Laws which are at present, or which may be hereafter, in 
force in the Ottoman Empire, shall be applied to the Pashalic of Egypt as to 
every other province of the Empire. 

This condition, which the Four Courts look upon as indispensable, consti- 
tutes in their view one of the strongest bonds for reuniting Egypt with Turkey, 
as an integral part of the Ottoman [mpire. 

The sixth paragraph of the same Act imports that the land and sea forces 
which may be maintained in Egypt, forming part of the forces of the Ottoman 
Empire, shall always be considered available for the general service of the State. 

Lastly, by the instruction concerted at London on the 15th of October, and 
confirmed by the Memorandum drawn up on the 14th of November, it was 
formally admitted, that if Mehemet Ali or one of his descendants should infringe 
the conditions on which the hereditary Government of Egypt should have been 
entrusted to him, that title would be liable to revocation. 

The Undersigned are fain to believe that the complete enforcement of the 
above-mentioned conditions would fully answer the intentions of the Sultan ; 
would realise all the wishes of the Four Allied Courts; and would happily 
accomplish the work of pacification which forms the object of their mutual 
engagements recorded in the Convention of July 15. For, in fact, by the 
accomplishment of these conditions, the objects on which the solicitude and the 
foresight of the High Contracting Parties has been fixed, would be attained. 

The Sultan would henceforth be assured of the obedience and submission of 
his Pasha, Governor of Egypt; the populations of that Province would be 
secured from the oppression from which they have had to suffer during these 
latter years, in consequence of the abuses of the local administration ; lastly, 
Mehemet Ali would obtain for himself and for his family, a position which would 
peaceably ensure his future existence, without, however, impairing in the least 
degree, the duties which he will have to discharge, as a subject of the Sultan. 

The Undersigned, in bringing these considerations to the knowledge of his 
Excellency Chekib Effendi, request him to lay them without delay before his 
Court, and to urge the Government of His Highness to give them its most 
serious consideration. 

They have the honour.at the same time to offer to the Ambassador of the 
Sublime Ottoman Porte the renewed assurance of their high consideration. 


(Signed) ESTERHAZY. NEUMANN. 
PALMERSTON. 
BULOW. 
BRUNNOW. 
London, January 30, 1841. 
No. 146. 


Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, January 30, 1841. 


I TRANSMIT to your Excellency a copy of a Note which has been this day 
addressed by the Plenipotentiaries of the Four Powers to Chekib Effendi, who 
will send the original of it to his Government this day; and I have to instruct 
your Excellency to show this note to such of your Colleagues of the Conference 
of the Four Powers as may not have received it from their Colleagues here. 


Iam, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 147. 
Sir John Barrow to J. Backhouse, Esq. 


Sir, Admiralty, February 1, 1841. 
_ I AM commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to trans~ 
mit to you the accompanying copy of a letter from Admiral the Honourable Sir 


175 


Robert Stopford, Commander-in-Chief of Her Majesty’s ships and vessels in the 
Mediterranean, and of its inclosures, reporting that the Sultan’s flag is flying on 
the Turkish fleet in the harbour of Alexandria, the recall of the Egyptian Army 
from Syria, and the entire submission of Mehemet Ali to the Sultan; and I am 
to request that you will lay the same before Viscount Palmerston. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) JOHN BARROW. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 147. 
Admiral Stopford to R. More O’ Ferrall, Esq. 


“* Princess Charlotte,” 
Sir, Marmorice, January 14, 1841. 


WITH reference to my letter of yesterday, I have great satisfaction in 
acquainting you for their Lordships’ information, that the Sultan’s flag is now 
flying on the Turkish fleet in the harbour of Alexandria, having been hoisted on 
the 11th instant by Admiral Walker, and saluted by all the shipping in the port. 
The Pasha has offered him every assistance, and he is now occupied in preparing 
the ships for sea, putting in here on their way back to Constantinople. 

Orders have been sent by the Pasha, with my sanction, for the recall of his 
army from Syria; and by his entire submission to the Sultan I hope I may now 
congratulate Her Majesty’s Government that this painful and embarrassing 
Eastern Question is at length happily brought to an end. 

For a more particular statement of the circumstances attending the event, 
I refer you to Commodore Sir Charles Napier’s letter of the 11th, which 
reached me by the “Stromboli” a few hours only after I had despatched the 
‘* Hydra” so as to be at Marseilles by the 20th; and to one from Admiral 
Walker with a proces verbal by Boghos Bey of the conversation between the 
pasha and the Commodore previous to the surrender. 

Considering this event of such infinite importance, I am anxious this should 
reach Her Majesty’s Government at the earliest period possible, and have 
despatched the ‘‘ Gorgon” with it to Malta on account of the quarantine, with 
orders to Rear-Admiral Sir John Louis to forward a steamer to Marseilles with 
Lieutenant Edward Stopford, who has orders to proceed with it to the Admiralty 
with all possible despatch. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) ROBERT STOPFORD, 
Admiral. 


Sub-Inclosure ] in No. 147. 
Commodore Napier to Admiral Stopford. 


Her Majesty’s Ship ‘‘Carysfort,” Alewandria, 
Sir, January 11, 1841. | 

I ARRIVED here in the afternoon of the 8th, and on anchoring, an officer 
came on board to compliment me in the name of Mehemet Ali, and to say his 
Highness would be glad to see me as_soon as convenient. 

I gave the officer to understand I was charged with despatches to Boghos 
Bey, and after I had delivered them I should have the honour of paying my 
respects to his Highness. 

Between seven and eight in the evening, I repaired to the Palace and de- 
livered to Boghos Bey your letter, and also put into his hands an extract of Lord 
Palmerston’s instructions of the 15th of December, beginning with the words, 
‘‘ Now it is necessary that Sir Robert Stopford.” 

Boghos Bey, after some explanations on my part, did not seem to be mucl 
disappointed at the refusal of the Allies to give a guarantee, but he expressed his 
dissatisfaction at the word ‘ Hereditary” not appearing in the letter of Rechid 
Pasha to the British Ambassador, and observed that there would be some diffi- 
culty with the Pasha, as he fully expected on his submission the “ Hereditary 
Pashalic of Egypt” would be conferred on him. 


ee ae), ee ee 


176 


On being introduced to the Pasha he was by no means in good-humour, 
and was evidently disappointed at the communication Boghos Bey had pre- 
viously made to him. 

I acquainted his Highness that I had directions to allow vessels to proceed 
to Kaiffato embark the sick, wounded, women and children, and others of the 
Egyptian army, and that a British officer should accompany the person he sent 
with directions to evacuate Syria, to see his orders carried into execution ; and 
that I should give every assistance to fit out the Turkish fleet, which I regret- 
ted to see in the same state that I had left it. He observed that it was not his 
fault, that after the agreement I had made with him, the officer had been sent 
back from Syria with the agreement disallowed. I remarked that the difficulty 
was now obyiated, that the agreement had been approved of in London with the 
exception of the guarantee. 

To this he replied that he did not care so much about the guarantee, but 
the word “Hereditary” had been left out,—that Lord Palmerston’s letter to 
Lord Ponsonby dated the 15th October, which had been made public, decidedly 
said the Porte would be strongly recommended to give him the Hereditary 
Pashalic; that in M. Guizot’s speech to the French Chambers, he had declared 
that the Allies would recommend it; and in fine, that the agreement signed by 
Boghos Bey and myself stipulated that the fleet should be given up on receiving 
the Official Account that the Sublime Porte would confer on him the Heredi- 
tary Government of Egypt; that, notwithstanding this, in Lord Palmerston’s in- 
structions of the 14th November, communicated to him by Captain Fanshawe, 
the word “Hereditary” was left out. But nevertheless he had entirely sub- 
mitted himself to the will of the Sultan, and asked for no terms, being convinced 
he would be confirmed in the fullest terms. 

After some conversation on indifferent subjects, I took my leave, and was 
requested to see Boghos Bey the following morning, after the papers had 
been translated and considered by the Pasha. 

At eleven the next morning I waited on Boghos Bey, who again expressed 
to me the disappointment and dissatisfaction of the Pasha, not so much at the 
refusal of the guarantee as at the word “ Hereditary” being left out in Rechid 
Pasha’s letter; he said the Pasha had done everything he could to gain the good- 
will of England; that the interests of Great Britain and Egypt were identified ; 
and he again recurred to the reasons he had to believe he should enjoy the 
Hereditary Title. 

I said I was not without hope that the British Government would still use 
their influence with the Porte to obtain that point, and that I should do every- 
thing in my power to forward the Pasha’s wishes, and I had reason to believe 
they would be complied with. 

He requested me to read that part of Lord Palmerston’s letter approving 
of my Convention, which I consented to do, but to be considered as a private 
communication and not to go further ; this he received with much satisfaction, 
and said if I_ would read it to the Pasha he was certain it would go a great way 
to tranquillize him. In the evening I again waited on Mehemet Ahi, and I read 
to him the other part of Lord Palmerston’s instructions, which had some effect 
in putting him in good-humour. . 

He however still lingered after Syria, and talked a good deal about the im- 
possibility of quitting it till the Spring without a great loss of life and stores, 
and was anxious that the women and children, and the sick, should be allowed 
to embark at Beyrout or Sidon, or the most convenient place, should the army 
be still at Damascus. 

observed on this, that the weather was better now than when the Con- 
vention was signed, and was improving every day. That I had no authority to 
allow any embarkation at Beyrout or Sidon, but that I should direct the officer 
in command of the Coast of Syria, to give every facility in his power ; and that 
I felt satisfied the best way to ensure the British Government pressing the 
point of the Hereditary Government was, by throwing no difficulties in the way; 
that, whether or no, his son would succeed him ; and as to a guarantee, he bad 
shown it was more necessary to guarantee the Porte against him than him 
against the Porte. He was a good deal flattered at this observation, and at last 
consented to all I requested, and which I got in writing yesterday morning, a 
copy of which I have the honour to inclose. 

The Egyptian steamer started yesterday afternoon, and I send copies of 


V7 


the orders I have written to the Senior Military and Naval Officers, as well as the 
instructions to Lieutenant Loring, which I trust will meet your approbation. 

T really do think, under all circumstances, Mehemet Ali has behaved very 
well; both his Highness and Boghos Bey assure me of their good wishes to 
Great Britain, and I feel positive if Lord Palmerston can obtain for him the 
Hereditary Pashalic of Egypt, he will have no occasion to regret it. 

The Commissioners arrived yesterday afternoon, and Admiral Walker took 
command of the Turkish fleet to-day at noon. 

Thus terminated this great Question, the solution of which (under your 
orders) I had the honour to commence at Djounie and finish at Alexandria. 

I am happy to say that the Pasha has abandoned the monopoly of agri- 
cultural produce, except cotton, which may be exported on paying a duty of 12 
per cent. 

It is quite impossible to say at present what assistance Admiral Walker 
will require, and I do not like to detain the “Stromboli” lest she should be too 
late for the steamer going to Marseilles; but if you could spare “ Castor” and 
“ Daphne” they would be useful ; and if you approve of it, I could call up “ Dido,” 
“ Hazard,” and “ Magicienne,” should they be required. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER, 


Commodore. 


Sub-Inclosure 2 in No. 147. 
Boghos Joussouf to Commodore Napier. 


Monsieur le Commodore, Alexandrie, le 10 Janvier, 1841. 


LA lettre que j’ai ’honneur de vous adresser aura pour objet de résumer, 
d’aprés le désir que vous en avez exprimé, les paroles que vous avez entendues 
de la bouche méme du Viceroi mon maitre, dans votre entretien de hier soir. 

Le retard apporté a l’évacuation de la Syrie est indépendant de la volonté 
de Son Altesse. En conséquence de la Convention conclue avec vous le 27 
Novembre dernier, Hamid Bey avait été envoyé en Syrie pour porter 4 Ibrahim 
Pacha les ordres du Viceroi. Vous connaissez, M. le Commodore, les raisons 
qui ont empéché cet officier supérieur de remplir sa mission, et vous savez de 
quelle nature ont été les obstacles qui se sont opposés a ce que les dépéches de 
Son Altesse parvinssent a leur destination. 

Le Viceroi, désirant toutefois vous donner une nouvelle preuve de son 
empressement a remplir ses engagemens, est disposé a faire partir aujourd’hui 
méme un bateau A vapeur pour porter de nouveau en Syrie Hamid Bey, qui 
sera chargé, conjointement avec l’officier Anglais désigné par vous, de trans- 
mettre les ordres au Général-en-Chef de ’armée Egyptienne. Aussitot qu’ [brahim 
Pacha en aura pris connaissance, il effectuera ’évacuation de la Syrie, en diri- 
geant vers Kaiffa, si cela lui est possible, les femmes, les enfans, et malades, 
et en se mettant lui-méme en marche vers l’Egypte, dans le cas ot il ne 
serait pas déja méme en route avec son armée pour opérer sa retraite dans cette 
direction. Au moment ou le retour de Hamid Bey nous aura fait connaitre 
les dispositions prises par. Ibrahim Pacha en exécution des ordres de Son 
Altesse, et lorsque nous aurons acquis la certitude que les malades, femmes et 
enfans, appartenant a l’armée Egyptienne, ont pu se rendre a Kaiffa, Son Altesse 
enverra, dans cette échelle, des transports destinés a assurer leur retour en 
Egypte. 

Pour ce qui concerne la flotte Ottomane, je ne puis que confirmer ce que 
jai précédemment eu l’honneur de vous écrire, M. le Commodore—elle est préte 
a prendre la mer, 

Telle est la substance des termes dans lesquels Je Viceroi s’est exprimé 
avec vous, M. le Commodore. Son Altesse, en vous donnant ainsi un nouveau 
témoignage de sa déférence aux décisions des Puissances Alliées, a la conviction 
qu’elles hateront l’exécution du Traité du 15 Juillet, en obtenant en sa faveur 
le Gouvernement héréditaire de VEgypte; et qu’elles manifesteront leur 
intention d’assurer la pacification de l’Orient, en la fondant sur des bases a 
jamais durables. 

Je saisis, &c., 
(Signé) BOGHOS JOUSSOUF. 
A ; 


178 


(Translation.) 


Monsieur le Commodore, Alexandria, January 10, 1841. 


THE object of the letter which I have the honour to address to you, is to 
recapitulate, according to the desire which you have expressed to me, the words 
which you heard from the mouth of the Viceroy, my master himself, in your con- 
versation yesterday evening. ; 

The delay which has occurred in the evacuation of Syria is not dependent on 
the will of his Highness.’ In consequence of the Convention concluded with 
you on the 27th of November last, Hamid Bey was sent to Syria, to carry the 
Viceroy’s orders to Ibrahim Pasha. You know, M. le Commodore, the reasons 
which hindered that superior officer from fulfilling his mission, and you are 
acquainted with the nature of the obstacles which prevented the despatches of 
his Highness from reaching their destination. 

The Viceroy, always desirous to give you a fresh proof of his readiness to 
fulfil his engagements, proposes to despatch a steam-vessel this very day to take 
back to Syria Hamid Bey, who will be charged, in conjunction with the English 
officer appointed by you, to deliver the orders to the General-in-Chief of the 
Egyptian army. As soon as Ibrahim Pasha shall be made acquainted with 
them, he will immediately effect the evacuation of Syria, despatching, if it is in his 
power to do so, the women, children, and sick towards Kaiffa, and marching himself 
towards Egypt, should he not be already in motion with his army to effect his 
retreat in that direction. Immediately on our being made acquainted, by the 
return of Hamid Bey, with the measures taken by [brahim Pasha in execution of 
the orders of his Highness, and as soon as we shall have acquired the certainty 
that the sick, women, and children belonging to the Egyptian army have been 
able to proceed to Kaiffa, his Highness will send transports to that port to secure 
their return to Egypt. 

With respect to the Ottoman fleet, I can only confirm what I had for- 
merly the honour of writing to you, M. le Commodore ; it is ready to put to sea. 

Such is the substance of the terms in which the Viceroy expressed him- 
self to you, M. le Commodore. His Highness, in thus giving you a fresh proof 
of his deference to the decisions of the Allied Powers, is convinced that they 
will hasten the execution of the Treaty of the 15th of July by obtaining in his 
favour the hereditary Government of Egypt ; and that they will show their inten- 
tion of securing the pacification of the East, by placing it on an imperishable 
foundation. 

I take, &c., 
(Signed) BOGHOS JOUSSOUF. 


Sub-Inclosure 3 in No. 147. 


Admral Walker to Admiral Stopford. 


Her Majesty’s Steamer “ Stromboli,” 
My dear Sir, Alexandria, January 11, 1841. 
__ MEHEMET ALT has just delivered up to my charge the Sultan’s fleet, 
with permission to take the Egyptian officers and men as far as Marmorice, 
which I intend to avail myself of; so it will not therefore be necessary to have 
any English officers to assist in getting them across. I have not been able to 
see Commodore Napier since I hoisted my flag, to inform him of Mehemet Ali’s 
offer; and as the “ Stromboli” is now under weigh, I have not time to add 
more than a request, that you will kindly pardon this hurried communication, 
and believe me to be, &c., 


(Signed) R. W. WALKER. 


ees sssssthssssassiesieeeseseintsessieasess> 


No. 148. 


Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewed February 4.) 


My Lord, Paris, February \, 1841. 


te. THE report of the discussion in the two Houses of Parliament on the 
address, in answer to the Queen’s speech, has produced a most satisfactory 
effect upon the public here, as well as on the Government. The French people 
have been taught to believe by the late Ministry, by the greater portion of the 
press of this country, by many of their orators in the Chamber, that France 
had been treated contemptuously, that the Treaty of the 15th of July was an 
Alhance formed, not for the mere purpose of settling the Eastern Question, but 
with hostile intentions against France, or at least for the purpose of excluding 
France from all consultation with the other Powers on the general affairs of 
Kurope, and withholding from her the influence to which she was entitled in 
their regulation. 

The explanations given by M. Guizot in the Chambers had tended to 
undeceive the public, and, to a certain degree, the irritation of the nation had 
subsided. But the good feeling towards France which was manifested on both 
sides in both the Houses of Parliament, by all the speakers who took a part in 
the debate on the address, seems to have entirely dissipated the illusion which 
was practised on the public. 

M. Guizot has, in the most explicit terms, expressed his satisfaction at the 
tenour of the debate; and seemed to consider it as an introduction to the 
re-establishment of that good understanding and concert, which it is desirable 
should subsist between all the Great Powers upon questions of general Euro- 
pean policy. M. Guizot said, he was not prepared to make any proposition ; 
but he referred to Marshal Soult’s Note of 1839, which had been addressed to 
the Courts of London, of Vienna, of Berlin, and of St. Petersburgh, and to 
which answers from each Court have been returned, corresponding very much 
with the sentiments expressed in that Note, as affording a basis of an arrange- 
ment between the Great Powers. . 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) GRANVILLE. 


No. 149. 
Mr. Larking to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received February 8.) 


My Lord, Alexandria, January 21, 1841. 


THE revival of trade consequent on the prospect of a speedy settlement of 
affairs of the Levant, has caused the British merchants to express some anxiety 
as to the future. 

I have on various oecasions been applied to, on the subject of the Com- 
mercial Treaty concluded between Great Britain and the Ottoman Porte on the 
16th of August, 1838, to know whether its provisions are to be immediately 
enforced, or to take effect in this country, in order that the merchants may regu- 
late their commercial operations accordingly. Not having received any instruc- 
tions from your Lordship, I am unable to give that definite information which is 
required, and have only been able to answer in general terms, that, although 
Mehemet Ali be confirmed in the Pashalic of Egypt, or even obtain the heredi- 
tary tenure of the same, that circumstance in no way alters his position as regards 
his allegiance to the Sultan, and the obligation he is under to regulate the admi- 
nistration of the Government intrusted to him, in accordance with the Treaties 
in force in other parts of the Turkish dominions. 

Mchemet Ali expresses himself greatly in favour of the Commercial Treaty, 
and professes anxiety to see it in vigour in this country; he has even gone so 
far as to throw open the importation of grain, seed, flax, and some other 
articles, on payment of the export Tegan: by that Treaty; but as the 


produce of the country is almost exclusively in his own possession, the benefit 
arising from this measure can only be felt by those few who occupy lands on 
which the arrears of taxation claimed by Government have been paid. In 
fact, until a complete reform takes place in the internal administration of the 
affairs of Egypt, the Commercial Treaty will remain a dead letter, and will 
only have the effect of burthening the merchant with an additioual import 
duty, without enabling him to reap the benefit in consideration of which that 
duty was increased. 

Mehemet Ali will, I am confident, turn his attention to correcting the 
many serious abuses which exist; but he is, unfortunately, surrounded by 
advisers whose interest it is to maintain them, and who keep him as much in 
the dark as possible as to the exactions of the Governors and others employed 
in the distant provinces. It is these exactions which reduce the cultivators of 
the soil to the lowest degree of misery, and effectually prevent them from liqui-’ 
dating the arrears of an accumulating taxation. As debtors to the Government 
they forfeit the crops of their lands, and these are seized and carried to the Govern- 
ment magazines, which are thus filled with the greater part of the produce of 
the country, and consequently the merchant who wishes to purchase for expor- 
tation, is compelled to supply himself from these stores at such prices as the 
Government chooses to fix. With a view to remedy these evils, Said Bey, the 
son of Mehemet Ali, is at present on an excursion into the interior of the 
country ; he is to ascertain, with as much accuracy as lies in his power, the 
extent of existing abuses, and to report the same to his father. 

I have no doubt but that some good will result from this measure, but I 
fear not to the extent required. To render this reform complete, Mehemet Ahi 
must not only make great alterations in his internal administration, but also 
consent to heavy pecuniary sacrifices, by remitting a portion, or even the 
whole, of the debt which weighs upon the cultivator and paralyzes his 
energies. 

It may be difficult to persuade Mehemet Ali at once to adopt those 
measures of reform; and even if adopted, it would require time to enable 
them to work well. But, should Her Majesty’s Government deem the subject 
of sufficient importance to merit its attention, I feel confident that a simple 
recommendation from your Lordship would at this moment have the greatest 
effect in stimulating the resolutions of Mehemet Ali, and produce the most 
beneficial results. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) JOHN W. LARKING. 


No. 150. 
Mr. Larking to Viscount Palmerston.— (Received February 8.) 


My Lord, Alexandria, January 22, 184). 


I HAVE the honour to report to your Lordship that Commodore Sir 
Charles Napier arrived here on the 6th instant, with instructions from the 
Commander-in-Chief to make known to Mehemet Ali, that although the Allied 
Powers approved of the spirit of the Convention signed by the Commodore on 
the 27th of November, 1840, it nevertheless contained some stipulations 
respecting the guarantee required by Mehemet Ali for the hereditary govern- 
ment of Egypt with which they could not comply, and to recommend that both 
the evacuation of Syria and the restitution of the Turkish fleet should be imme- 
diate and unconditional. 

After a few interviews with Mehemet Ali, Sir Charles succeeded in 
obtaining the object of his mission, and received a letter to that effect from 
Boghos Bey, in which he stated the willingness of Mehemet Ali to do all that 
was demanded of him, and expressing a hope that this prompt compliance with 
the wishes of the Allies, would induce them to recommend to the Sultan to 
grant him the hereditary government of the Pashalic of Egypt. As Sir Charles 
Napier has already forwarded to your Lordship a copy of this letter with a 


eine account of his proceedings, it is unnecessary for me to enlarge on the 


181 


in accordance with an arrangement with Boghos Bey, Abdul-Hamid Bey 
and an English officer were despatched to Ibrahim Pasha with the order for the 
immediate evacuation of Syria; and on the same day (the 10th instant), Admiral 
Walker, accompanied by Mazloum Bey, arrived here, and on the following 
morning, having hoisted his flag and taken formal possession of the fleet, imme- 
diately commenced fitting it for sea; and the preparations were carried on with 
such activity, that all the vessels are now on their way for Marmorice, with the 
exception of two, which will shortly sail. 

The prospect of a speedy settlement of the Egyptian Question has given 
general satisfaction throughout the country, and the latent discontent and feverish 
anxiety previously existing among the native population has partially subsided. 

[ have, &c., 


(Signed) JOHN W. LARKING. 


No, 151. 


Mr. Larking to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received February 8.) 


My Lord, Alexandria, January 23, 1841. 


I HAVE the honour to acquaint your Lordship that Ibrahim Pasha was 
yesterday reported to have arrived at Ramla, on his way to Gaza. A telegra- 
phic despatch has this morning reached Mehemet Ali, that Solyman Pasha with 
the division under his command, amounting to 8,000 men, including some 
Cavalry and Artillery, has arrived at Suez. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) JOHN W. LARKING. 


No. 152. 3 


Viscount Palmerston to Mr. Larking. 


Sir, Foreign Office, February 11, 1841. 


I HAVE received your despatch of the 21st of January, reporting 
that you have been applied to on various occasions for information whether the 
provisions of the Commercial Conyention of August, 1838, are to take effect in 
Egypt ; and that in the absence of instructions, you have confined your replies 
to a general statement of your opinion, that under any circumstances, Mehemet 
Ali will be bound to conform to the treaties in force in other parts of the 
Turkish dominions. 

You acted rightly in thus answering; and I have, moreover, to state to 
you, with reference to your further observations as to the fiscal abuses prevalent 
in Egypt, that as all the laws and treaties of the Turkish Empire are to apply to, 
and to be executed in, Egypt, as wellas in every other province of the Empire, 
these local abuses will necessarily cease, and the Convention of August, 1838, 
will be carried into execution in Egypt as elsewhere. 

Iam, &c., 


(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 153. 


Viscount Ponsonby te Viscount Palmerston.—(Received February 8.) 
My Lord, Therapia, January 3, 1841. 


I HAVE the honour to inclose copy of the Grand Vizier’s reply to Mehe- 
met Ali’s letter brought here by Captain Fanshawe. The Vizier’s letter is 
committed to the care of Admiral Walker and Mazloum Bey, who are also 
appointed the Commissioners of the Sublime Porte to receive from Mehemet 
Ali the Ottoman fleet. 

I have, &c., 


(Signed) PONSONBY, 


RR RSA RES PSE TI TCI 


182 


Inclosure in No. 153. 


Reply of His Highness the Grand Vizier to Mehemet Ali. 


(Traduction.) 


J’Al pris connaissance du contenu de la belle dépéche que vous venez de 
nVenvoyer en date du 17 Chewal (le 22 Novembre), et qui a été mise aussi sous 
les yeux de Sa Majesté Impériale. : 

On voit par la communication de Votre Altesse, que vous avez formé le 
dessein de faire véritablement votre soumission 4 Sa Hautesse, et qu’en preuve 
méme de cela, vous avez pris le parti de rendre immédiatement la flotte Impé- 
riale, et de remettre sans délai certains endroits situés hors de I’ Egypte. 

L’intention et les bonnes dispositions que vous venez de manifester, étant 
dun heureux présage pour l’adoption et la mise en pratique du bon systéme et 
des bons procédés voulus, Sa Hautesse les a justement apprécices. 

Dans toutes ses affaires, dans tous ses procédés, la Sublime Porte, guidée 
par des sentimens équitables, a pour maxime de ne point s’écarter des regles de 
la modération. 

C’est pourquoi Sa Hautesse est disposée a accueillir favorablement la sou- 
mission que vous avez offerte, et 4 pardonner a Votre Altesse complétement. 

Aussitot done que, conformément & votre engagement, la flotte Impériale 
sera sortie du port d’Alexandrie et expédiée avec tous les officiers et tous les 
équipages, quelques personnes bien connues exceptées, et avec toutes les armes 
et toutes les munitions, et que les endroits qu’on sait auront été remis sans 
délai aux Commissaires de la Sublime Porte, et que ce seront la des faits accom- 
plis ; c’est-a-dire, lorsque la nouvelle positive en sera parvenue ici; il est décidé- 
ment résolu qu’alors Sa Majesté Impériale daignera réintégrer Votre Altesse 
dans le Gouvernement de l’Egypte. Cette maniére de voir de Sa Hautesse, et 
les opinions pacifiques et bienveillantes des Grandes Puissances, s’accordant 
parfaitement sur ce point, cette résolution a été portée officiellement a la 
connaissance de MM. les Représentans des Cours Alliées. 

Son Excellence Mazloum Bey Effendi, l'un des Principaux Employés de 
la Sublime Porte, et Membre du Conseil de Justice, ci-devant Moustéchar de 
VAmirauté, a été chargé de l’exécution des instructions nécessaires ; et le Férik 
de la Marine Impériale, le trés-distingué Yaver Pacha, est chargé de prendre la 
flotte Impériale et de la conduire ici. 

On laisse 4 votre sagacité a faire ce qu’il faut. 


(Translation. ) 


I HAVE taken cognizance of the contents of the good despatch which you 
addressed to me dated the 17th Chewal, (the 22nd November,) and which has 
also been laid before His Imperial Majesty. 

It appears, from Your Highness’s communication, that you intend 
really to make your submission to His Highness, and that in proof of this you 
have decided immediately to restore the Imperial fleet, and to surrender, 
without delay, certain places situated out of Egypt. 

The intentions and good disposition which you have thus evinced, being 
a happy omen that the good system and the good proceedings which are desired, 
eh be adopted and carried into execution, His Highness has duly appreciated 
them. 

In all its affairs, in all its proceedings, the Sublime Porte, guided by 
feelings of justice, makes it a rule never to exceed the bounds of 
moderation. 

On this account His Highness is disposed to accept your submission with 
favour, and to grant Your Highness his full pardon. 

As soon then as, in conformity with your engagements, the Imperial fleet 
shall have left the harbour of Alexandria, and shall be despatched with all its 
oflicers and crews, some well-known persons excepted, and with all its equip- 
ments and stores, and the places already known shall have been made over 
without delay to the Commissioners of the Sublime Porte, and when these acts 
shall be accomplished, that is to say, when positive intelligence of this shall 
have arrived here, it is decidedly resolved that then His Imperial Majesty will 
deign to reinstate Your Highness in the Government of Egypt. These views 


183 


of His Highness, and the pacific and benevolent opinions of the Great Powers, 
being quite in accordance upon this point, this resolution hasb een officially 
made known to the Representatives of the Allied Courts. . 

His Excellency Mazloum Bey, one of the principal servants of the Sublime 
Porte, Member of the Council of Justice, and formerly Mousteshar of the 
Admiralty, is charged with the execution of the necessary instructions; and 
the Ferik of the Imperial navy, the most distinguished Yaver Pasha, is charged 
to receive the Imperial fleet and bring it here. 

We leave to your wisdom to do what is necessary. 


No. 154. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received February 8.) 


My Lord, Therapia, January 10, 1841. 

I TRANSMIT copies of correspondence between the Internuncio, Count 

Keenigsmarck, M. Titow, and myself, upon the subject of a measure proposed 

by the Internuncio, and also the substance of an iostruction I sent this day to 

the Dragoman, immediately after I had the honour to receive your Lordship’s 
instructions by the messenger Townley. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure |] in No. 154. 


M. Pisani to Viscount Ponsonby. 
My Lord, Péra, ce 7 Janvier, 1841. 


LE BARON STURMER a eu ce matin avec Réchid Pacha une téte-a- 
téte de trois heures. Le Baron a communiqué des dépéches de sa Cour, 
lesquelles annoncent que les Quatre Puissances se sont décidées 4 demander 
Vhérédité pour Méhémet Ali. Voila ce que Réchid Pacha m’a dit, en ajoutant 
que Lord Palmerston est parfaitement d’accord sur ce point, c’est-a-dire, de faire 
donner Vhérédité. 


(Signé) F. PISANI, 


(Translation.) 

My Lord, Pera, Janwary 7, 1841. 
BARON STURMER had an interview of three hours with Rechid Pasha 
this morning. The Baron communicated despatches from his Court, which 
announce that the Four Powers have decided upon applying for the hereditary 
succession for Mehemet Ali. ‘This is what Rechid Pasha has told me, adding 
that Lord Palmerston perfectly agrees upon this point, namely, the obtaining 

the grant of the hereditary succession. 

Accept, &c., 

(Signed) F. PISANI 


Inclosure 2 in No. 154. 


Baron Sturmer to Viscount Ponsonby. 
(Extract.) Le 7 Janvier. 


S’IL a pu nous rester quelques doutes sur les véritables intentions de nos 
Gouvernemens, les dépéches que j’ai recues hier du Prince de Metternich sont bien 
faites pour les détruire complétement. Le Prince est impatient de savoir quelle 
suite j’ai donnée A ses directions précédentes, et auxquelles le Mémorandum du 
14 Novembre sert de base, et me dit et me répéte, de la maniére la plus 
péremptoire, que les Quatre Cours se sont prononcées pour que Pherédite dans 
les fonctions du Gouvernement d’Egypte soit accordée a la famille de Meheémet Ali. 

Je vais en conséquence adresser 4 Réchid Pacha la lettre ci-jointe en copie, 
et la lui porter moi-méme pour y ajouter de vive voix tous les développemens 
nécessaires. Jl me parait important surtout de lui faire sentir la nécessité 


184 


d’adresser sur-le-champ 4 Mazloum Bey de nouvelles instructions, et de les 
faire partir dés demain, si cela est possible, pour le ratteindre en route. La 
pensée de votre Cabinet étant absolument identique avec celle du mien, je ne 
doute pas que vous ne jugiez d-propos de vous expliquer dans le méme sens 
envers la Porte. ) 

Je vous avoue que ce n’est pas sans quelque regret que je vois ainsi 
s‘évanouir Vespoir que nous avions de voir la puissance de Méhémet Ali 
s’écrouler de fond en comble; mais mon role est fini, et il ne me reste plus qu’a 
attendre en silence les ordres que mon Gouvernement voudra bien me faire 
parvenir, et d les exécuter scrupuleusement. Je suis sir d’avance que vous 
approuverez cette maniére de voir, et je m’en félicite, car vous savez, mon cher 
Vicomte, quel prix j’attache 4 votre suffrage. 


(Translation.) 
January 7. 


IF we could have any doubts remaining as to the real intentions of our 
Governments, the despatches which I received yesterday from Prince 
Metternich are well calculated to remove those doubts entirely. The Prince 
is impatient to know what effect I have given to his preceding instructions, for 
which the Memorandum of the 14th of November serves as the basis; and he 
tells me and repeats to me, in the most peremptory manner, that the Four 
Courts have pronounced that the hereditary succession in the functions of the 
Government of Egypt should be granted to the family of Mehemet Ali. 

I am, consequently, about to address to Rechid Pasha the letter, of 
which a copy is inclosed, and to take it to him myself in order that 1 may 
add thereto, by word of mouth, all the necessary explanations. It appears 
to me above all important that he should be made to feel the necessity of 
forthwith addressing fresh instructions to Mazloum Bey, and of sending them 
off to-morrow, if possible, in order to overtake him on his way. ‘The inten- 
tion of your Cabinet being absolutely identic with that of mine, I have no 
doubt that you will think it proper to explain yourself in the same sense 
owards the Porte. 

I confess to you that it is not without some regret that I see the hope 
which we had entertained of beholding the power of Mehemet Ali crumble to 
pieces, disappear in this way; but my part is played, and it only remains for 
me to await in silence the orders which my Government will be pleased to 
transmit to me, and to execute them scrupulously. JI am already convinced 
that you will approve of this view of the subject, and I congratulate myself 
thereupon, for you know, my dear Viscount, how much value I attach to your 
support. 


Sub-Inclosure in Inclosure 2 in No. 154. 
Baron de Sttirmer to Rechid Pasha. 


(Extract.) Constantinople, le 7 Janvier, 1841. 
_ SI quelques doutes avaient pu tenir nos esprits en suspens relativement A la 

veritable portée du Mémorandum de la Conférence de Londres du 14 Novembre 
les dépéches que je viens de recevoir de ma Cour sont de nature A les dissiper 
completement. Ces dépéches m’apprennent de la maniére la plus positive que 
les Cours Alliées désirent vivement qu’il plaise 4 Sa Majesté Impériale le Sultan 
daccorder a Méhémet Ali le gouvernement héréditaire de Egypte pour prix 
de sa soumission, és lors je ne saurais me dispenser de faire observer A. votre 
Excellence, que par Pomission qui a été faite de la promesse formelle de 
Vherédité dans la réponse du Grand Vizir 4 Méhémet Ali, et dans les instruc- 
tions données aux Commissaires Ottomans, ces documens contiennent une 
lacune facheuse, et qu’il est d’une haute importance de remplir. 

Je viens done proposer & votre Excellence, et avec instance, d’aviser le 
plus tot possible aux moyens d’arréter les suites d’une semblable omission 

Dans ma pensée, la Sublime Porte devrait, sans perte de tems faire partir 
un bateau a vapeur directement pour Alexandrie, a leffet Wadresser 3 Mazloum 
Bey des instructions qui V’autorisent & accorder 4 Méhémet Ali V’hérédité du 
Pachalic d’Egypte sous les conditions prévues dans le Mémorandum. * 


185 


(Translation.) 


(Extract.) Constantinople, January 7, 1841. 

IF some doubts have kept our minds in suspense as to the real meaning 
of the Memorandum of the Conference of London of the 14th of November, 
the despatches which IJ have just received from my Court are of a nature to dis- 
sipate them entirely. These despatches inform me in the most positive man- 
ner that the Allied Courts are very desirous that it should please His Imperial 
Majesty the Sultan to grant to Mehemet Ali the hereditary government of 
Egypt as the price of his submission. Therefore I cannot refrain from observ- 
ing to your Excellency, that owing to the omission which has been made in 
the answer of the Grand Vizier to Mehemet Ali, and in the instructions given 
to the Ottoman Commissioners, of the formal promise of the hereditary 
succession, there is an unfortunate in those documents, and one which it is 
highly important to fill up. 

T therefore, now earnestly propose to your Excellency, to devise as soon 
as possible the means of arresting the consequences of such an omission. 

In my opinion, the Sublime Porte should, without loss of time, despatch 
a steam-boat direct to Alexandria, for the purpose of sending to Mazloum 
Bey instructions which would authorize him to grant to Mehemet Ali the 
hereditary succession in the Pashalic of Egypt upon the conditions anticipated 
by the Memorandum. : 


Inclosure 3 in No. 154. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Baron Sturmer. 


Dear Baron, Therapia, January 7, 1841. 


IT is late, between 10 and 11, and I will reply as briefly as possible to your 
letter which [ have just received, in order not to delay your messenger. It is 
wholly indifferent what may be the private opinion of any of us as to this 
question, which is the affair of our Governments, and for which none of us are 
responsible ; but it is another thing to act ‘‘ without orders,” and I will not incur 
‘‘that” responsibility, and therefore I must decline acting in concert with you until 
I am authorized to take the steps you propose, by instructions to that effect. It 
is necessary I should acquaint our Colleagues and the Ottoman Ministers with 
my position, and J shall do so without loss of time. I have been repeatedly told 
by the best authority, including yourself, if I mistake not, that your Government 
had not decided to grant the hereditary right to Mehemet Ali; and at the Con- 
ference it did appear that you had no authority to mention that point. This 
matter, however, is not of a very recent date, and it is not at all impossible that 
more than one alteration may have taken place in the language or opinion of that 
Government, and that which is erroneous now, may have been right before, or 
possibly may be so again, for in this affair there has been a perpetual fluctuation 
of circumstances. If my Government has not sent me orders, it cannot be for 
want of time, as they would have reached me through Vienna as soon as the 
instruction you have received. I will not detain your messenger any longer, and 
I will only add, that I see no sacrifice of duty, or to duty, in this affair, the line 
being very plain which is to be followed, namely, to execute the orders which 
may be given by superior authority. ’ 

Believe me, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


fat IDeA ahah: ss Bhs Sim Mlk i SS 
Inclosure 4 in No. 154. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Mr. Titow. 


My dear Sir, | Therapia, January 7, 1841. 


NO doubt you received from Baron de Sturmer the same communication 
he made to me late this night, of the measure he had to propose for the adoption 
; 2B 


186 


of the Sublime Porte, and therefore I need not give you the trouble of any 
report thereof; and it will be enough that I inform you of the substance of my 
reply to the Baron, namely, that I must decline acting in concurrence with him 
on this occasion, as I have not received instructions from my Government that 
authorize me to do what he requires, &c., and that I see no reason why I should 
not have received instructions vid Vienna, as soon asthe Baron received those 
upon which he is acting. It may be superfluous to recall to your memory, that 
my conduct had been governed by the principle admitted by the Baron, and by 
yourself, and Count Keenigsmarck ; that the offers to be made by the Sultan of 
favour, &c., were to be made upon the submission of Mehemet Ali, and that the 
Sublime Porte is the judge, whether or not submission has been made. Also, 
that the offer of the hereditary government of Egypt was to be conceded to 
Mehemet “ upon conditions.” Now, the fact is, that at the Conference the Otto- 
man Minister denied the submission, and it was resolved that measures should be 
taken to put that question to the test of experiment, and the Sublime Porte has, 
in consequence, sent Commissioners to ascertain the fact. This is acting in 
perfect accordance with all the instructions I have received, and to make conces- 
sions previous to submission would be in direct opposition to them. 

The next point I have to mention is the fact, that multiplied and positive 
instructions order me to call for the establishment of various most important 
conditions, upon which alone the hereditary government of Egypt is to be 
granted to Mehemet Ali; and in the measure adopted by the Internuncio, I 
cannot perceive any security for the establishment of those conditions previous to 
the grant of the hereditary government to Mehemet. 

I do not know what you may think proper to do on this occasion, and I 
should think it wrong on my part to take any step except in concert with all 
my Colleagues, particularly in an affair of such importance as the present. I 
will, therefore, take the liberty to beg you will answer’me upon this point, 
whether or not you give your concurrence to the step proposed by the Inter- 
nuncio, and if it be not taking too great a liberty, I will also venture to 
request you to send it to me in the forenoon of to-morrow. 

Believe me, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 5 in No. 154. 
M. Titow to Viscount Ponsonby. 
My Lord, Pera, 27 Décembre, 1840. 


8 Janvier, 184), 

ON m’a remis ce matin le billet que votre Excellence m’a fait Vhon- 
neur de m’écrire hier soir. Je ne puis qu’étre vivement flatté de la con- 
fiance avec laquelle vous voulez bien me demander, My Lord, si je compte 
m/’associer a la démarche proposée par M. l’Internonce. Je manquerais 
a mes devoirs si j’hésitais 4 y répondre avec une entiére franchise. 

La démarche dont il s’agit rencontre de la part de votre Excellence 
deux observations. La premiére est, que pour offrir 4 Méhémet Ali une 
faveur quelconque, la Sublime Porte avait 4 décider si la soumission est 
faite d’aprés la décision que Réchid Pacha nous a notifiée par ordre du 
Sultan. Sa Hautesse considérera cette soumission comme accomplie 
lorsque Méhémet Ali aura exécuté les conditions prescrites dans la ré- 
ponse du Grand Vizir, en conformité du Mémorandum du 14 Novembre: 
c’est sur une telle base que les deux Commissaires Ottomans ont été ex. 
pédiés 4 Alexandrie. Quelle que soit la nature des concessions a accorder 
elles ne pourront l’étre que moyennant l’accomplissement effectif de ces 
ordres, par la remise de la flotte, la consignation des provinces. La dé- 
marche actuelle de M. le Baron de Stiirmer ne me parait rien changer a 
ce principe. 

La seconde observation est que Vhérédité ne peut étre accordée qu’a 
de certaines conditions qui seraient passées sous silence dans cette dé- 
marche. Mais la nécessité de ces conditions est hautement proclamée 
par l Acte Séparé du 15 Juillet, et par les Instructions Britanniques du 15 
Octobre, dont le Mémorandum du 14 Novembre est le complément. Elles 


187 


ne sauraient donc, “en principe,” étre sujettes A aucun doute. Pource qui 
concerne “ les développemens,” les Cours Alliées paraissent n’avoir pas aper- 
gu d’inconvénient 4 ce que la Porte ne les arrétat qu’aprés mire réflexion 
et aprés des pourparlers préalables, parce que M. le Prince Metternich n’a 
lui-méme envoyé ici des instructions sur les conseils 4 donner a cet égard, 
qu’au moment ou la premiére nouvelle de la Convention du Commodore 
Napier a fait supposer 4 Vienne que le fond de la question était résolu 
d’une maniére définitive. 

Raisonnant sur ces deux bases, je trouve pour m’associer a la dé- 
marche actuelle de M. de Stiirmer, les mémes motifs qui ont di me déter- 
miner 4 partager le vote qu’il a émis dans notre Conférence ; mon langage 
ne pouvait étre dicté que par les piéces arrétées 4 Londres, et transmises 
ici pour notre gouvernement. Nous avons observé dés-lors, que le Mémo- 
randum du 14 Novembre n’abrogeait point les ordres du 15 Octobre, rela- 
tifs 4 Vhérédité; mais comme il ne les reproduisait pas non plus d’une 
maniére aussi explicite, nous avons cru avec M. |’Internonce, que les con- 
seils prévus par le Mémorandum pouvaient se borner a la simple réinté- 
gration du Pacha. Aujourd’hui nous n’avons pas en vue de nouveaux 
ordres, mais bien une interprétation donnée par une autorité aussi com- 
pétente que parait l’étre M. le Prince Metternich pour juger de la pensée 
commune qui a présidé a la rédaction de cet Acte. Je me trouve ainsi 
pour ma part d’autant moins autorisé a révoquer en doute la validité d’une 
pareille communication, que dans notre conférence avec Réchid Pacha, 
votre Excellence a bien voulu annoncer de son cété, que les ordres du Ca- 
binet Britannique l’appellent a conseiller non seulement la réintégration, 
mais aussi ’hérédité, une fois que la Porte aura statué sur la question de 
la soumission. Or, s’il est vrai que le Sultan ait décidé cette question de 
la maniére exposée la-dessus, l'un de ces conseils soit de la sorte devenu 
applicable a la circonstance ; l’autre n’en parait plus étre que l’inévitable 
complément. 

En vous demandant bien pardon, My Lord, de la hate avec laquelle 
jécris cette réponse, j’en espére que dans ma résolution de concourir a la 
demande actuelle de M.|’Internonce, vous voudrez bien apercevoir le devoir 
invariable de régler ma conduite sur les indications qu’il nous est donné 
de puiser dans nos piéces officielles relativement 4 la pensée du Cabinet 
Britannique, qui, tout en marchant d’accord avec les autres Cours Alliées, 
figure en premiére ligne dans la question d’Kgypte. 

Veuillez, &c., 
(Signé) TITOW. 


(Translation.) 
My Lord, Pera December 27, 1840 


? January 8, 1841 

THE Note which your Excellency did me the honour to write to me 
yesterday evening was delivered to me this morning. I cannot but be 
highly flattered by the confidence with which you are good enough to 
ask me, my Lord, whether I intend to join in the measure proposed by 
the Internuncio. I should fail in my duty if I hesitated to reply thereto 
with perfect candour. 

The measure in question calls forth two observations on your Excel- 
lency’s part. The first is, that in order to offer any favour to Mehemet 
Ali, the Sublime Porte had to decide whether submission has been made 
in accordance with the decision which Rechid Pasha notified to us by 
order of the Sultan. His Highness will consider that submission as 
complete, when Mehemet Ali shall have executed the conditions pre- 
scribed in the answer of the Grand Vizier, in conformity with the 
Memorandum of the 14th of November; it is on this basis that the two 
Ottoman Commissioners were sent to Alexandria. Whatever may be the 
nature of the concessions to be granted, they can only be so as a result of 
the effectual fulfilment of those orders, by the restoration of the fleet, and 
by the surrender of the provinces. The present measure proposed by 
Baron Stiirmer does not appear to me at all to alter this principle. 

The second observation is, that the hereditary succession can only 
be granted upon certain conditions, ene would be passed over in silence 


188 


by this measure. But the necessity for these conditions is decidedly pro- 
claimed by the Separate Act of the 15th of July, and by the British 
instructions of the 15th of October, of which the Memorandum of the 4th 
of November is the completion. They cannot, then, in principle, be 
subject to any doubt. As far as the “explanations” are concerned, the 
Allied Courts appear not to have perceived any inconvenience in the 
Porte not deciding upon them until after mature reflection, and after 
previous discussions; for Prince Metternich has only himself sent 
instructions here as to the advice to be given in this respect, at the 
moment when the first news of the Convention of Commodore Napier had 
given rise at Vienna to the supposition that the main point of the 
question had been settled in a definitive manner. eet 

Arguing upon these two grounds, I find the same reasons for joming 
in the present measure of M. de Stiirmer, as those which determined me to 
share in the opinion which he advanced at our Conference; my language 
could only be dictated by the papers drawn up at London, and sent here 
for our guidance. We then observed, that the Memorandum of the 14th 
of November did not atall annul the orders of the 15th of October, relative 
to the hereditary succession ; but as it did not repeat them in an equally 
explicit manner, we thought with the Internuncio, that the advice antici- 
pated by the Memorandum might be confined to the simple reinstatement 
of the Pasha. We have no fresh instructions now before us, but ra- 
ther an interpretation given by an authority so competent as Prince 
Metternich appears to be to judge of the general opinion which prevailed 
when that Act was drawn up. For my part, therefore, I consider myself 
the less authorised to call in question the validity of such a communica- 
tion, because at our conference with Rechid Pasha your Excellency 
announced, on your part, that the orders of the British Cabinet called 
upon you to advise not only the reinstatement, but also the hereditary 
succession, when once the Porte had decided upon the question of the 
submission. Now, if it is true that the Sultan has decided that question 
in the manner above stated, one of those counsels would thus become 
applicable to the circumstances; the other appears to be no more than the 
inevitable completion of the first. 

Begging your pardon, my Lord, for the haste in which I write this 
answer, I hope that in my determination to concur in the present demand 
of the [nternuncio, you will perceive the invariable duty of regulating my 
conduct according to the inferences which we may be allowed to draw 
from our official despatches with respect to the opinion of the British 
Cabinet, which, at the same time that it acts in concurrence with the 
other Allied Courts, appears foremost in the Egyptian Question. 

Accept, &c., 
(Signed) TITOW. 


Inclosure 6 in No. 154. 
Viscount Ponsonby to M, Titow. 


My dear Sir, Therapia, January 8, 1841. 


YOUR messenger has just arrived, and I will not at this late hour 
enter at large into the subject of your obliging letter, to which I will reply 
when I can do so more to your own satisfaction in discussing the subject. 
I will now confine myself to the expression of my regret that I cannot 
concur in the measure proposed; not in consequence of my want of 
respect for the opinion of Prince Metternich, but because I think I should 
act contrary to my duty if I permitted my acts to be guided by that 
Minister’s instructions to the Internuncio, instead of waiting for the 
orders of my own Government. 

I confess I am at a loss to comprehend the necessity or advantage 
belonging to the measure, which has called for such hurried action. I do 
not perceive why what has already been done by the Sublime Porte 
should be the smallest obstacle to the grant to Mehemet Ali of any thing 


more, when the time clearly marked out in my instructions for making any 
such grant shall have arrived. You will recollect that it was late last 
night when I received the first intimation of this plan, and was called 
upon at once to adopt it, and I might upon that ground alone have been 
justified in declining to act until after consideration of the affair ; but it is 
not on that account I have declined: it is because I am not authorized to 
supersede the authority of my own Government in directing my actions, 
and because I see no necessity whatever for taking upon myself the 
responsibility of so doing upon this occasion, when, as I view the matter, 
there is nothing to be gained by the proposed measure, and nothing to be 
lost by its non-execution. 

I have troubled you with more than I intended to say at this moment, 
and I will endeavour to be less prolix when I have the honour to offer 
some observations on what you have said, and to place my own conduct 
in a clear light. 

Believe me, &c., 


(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 7 in No. 154. 
M. Titow to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, | Péra, le 9 Janvier, 1841. 


JE dois 4 votre Excellence mille excuses de n’avoir pas répondu 
jusqu’a présent 4 son billet d’hier. Vos réflexions n’ont pu ne pas pro- 
duire sur mon esprit une profonde impression. Je serais heureux de dé- 
férer complétement 4 votre opinion, qui certés posséde en sa faveur beau- 
coup d’argumens valides. Si je n’ai pu abandonner celle de M. |’Inter- 
nonce, j’espére que votre équité rendra justice 4 mes motifs. 

Nous avons a considérer deux choses,—le principe et Vopportunité de 
la mesure projetée. 

Le principe que les Cours Alliées se sont décidées pour Vhérédité, je 
ne puis le révoquer en doute, en prenant pour régle les instruc- 
tions du 15 Octobre, ot elle est mentionnée; le Mémorandum du 14 
Novembre, ot elle n’est point abrogée, mais qui au contraire reproduit. 
historiquement et en substance la piéce du 15 Octobre; enfin, l’explication 
positive donnée par M. le Prince Metternich, et combinée avec plus d’un 
indice qui vient a l’appui, dans les nouvelles d’Europe, dans les débats 
Parlementaires, et dans les feuilles Anglaises. 

L’opportunité serait susceptible d’une discussion trés-étendue. Elle 
ne saurait étre épuisée dans les limites de cette lettre. Il mesuffira d’ex- 
poser, que frappé comme je devais l’étre de vos doutes a cet égard, et 
réfiéchissant, d’un autre cété, aux motifs mis en avant par M. I’Inter- 
nonce, je me suis surtout attaché, d’accord avec lui, 4 faire ressortir 
aux yeux de Réchid Pacha combien il est essentiel d’éviter tout ce qui 
pourrait devenir décidément inopportun, tout ce qui tendrait 4 trop en- 
gager l’avenir ou a tomber en contradiction avec le passé. Ainsi, nous 
avons conseillé, que si la Porte se décide a hater annonce de l’hérédité, 
cette annonce ne soit pas formulée dans une nouvelle lettre 4 Méhémet 
Ali, mais tout simplement dans une instruction supplémentaire et confi- 
dentielle 4 Mazloum Bey; que cette instruction méme ne contienne rien 
qui ressemble 4 une donation du droit d’hérédité, mais qu’on s’y borne a 
la promettre éventuellement, c’est-d-dire, aprés la stricte et préalable exe- 
cution de toutes les clauses nécessaires pour constater la soumission ; que 
dans la méme piéce il soit expressément dit que Vhérédité ne sera accor- 
dée si ce n’est avec des conditions, dont'la base est indiquée d’avance par 
VActe Séparé du 15 Juillet, tandis que les détails en seront arrétés par 
la suite; que si la Porte se décide 4 expédier cette instruction par un py- 
roscaphe ad hoc, objet ostensible de son envoi n’aie rien de commun avec 
la question d’hérédité; enfin, que si ce navire trouve les Commissaires 
Ottomans soit partis d’Alexandrie, soit debouté par le refus de Méhé- 
met Ali d’obéir aux ordres consignés dans la réponse du Grand Vizir, on 


a o-.* 
‘ 


ne fasse aucun usage de l’instruction supplémentaire, et la rapporte, telle 
quelle, 4 Constantinople. Circonscrite en de telles bornes, il m’a semblé, 
pour ma part, que la démarche ne dévierait point des principes arrétes 1c1 
4 la suite de la derniére Conférence, et n’affaiblirait en rien les droits so- 
lennellement reconnus 4 la Sublime Porte par les Cours signataires de la 
Convention. . 

Ne possédant pour instruction spéciale que celle de régler mon lan- 
gage d’aprés les décisions de Londres, et n’ayant eu sous les yeux aucune 
piéce officielle qui modifie ce que nous en savons, jaime a esperer que 
votre Excellence trouvera ma conduite conforme aux seuls élémens qui 
pouvaient me servir de régle encette occasion. J’attache trop de prix a 
votre opinion pour ne pas tenir 4 coeur de paraitre correct a vos yeux. 

Apprenant qu’un courrier Britannique part ce solr, oserais-je vous 
prier, My Lord, de vouloir bien prendre sous vos auspices le pli ci-joint 
pour Londres. P 

Sa Majesté ’Empereur vient d’accorder un sabre orné de pierres pré- 
cieuses 4 Sélim Pacha, et la Sta. Anna seconde classe en diamans a l Ami- 
ral Walker, pour prix des exploits militaires en Syrie. Cette nouvelle 
m’a été bien agréable, et ne doutant pas qu’elle le soit aussi pour vous, 
My Lord, je me félicite de vous en informer. 

Il ne me reste en conclusion que de vous faire agréer, &c., 


(Signé) TITOW. 


(Translation. ) 


My Lord, Pera, January 9, 1840. 


I HAVE a thousand excuses to make to your Excellency for not 
answering until now your note of yesterday. Your reflections cannot but 
have produced a profound impression on my mind. I should be happy to 
defer completely to your opinion, which certainly has many valid argu- 
ments in its favour. If I have been unable to abandon that of the Inter- 
nuncio, I hope your equity will do justice to my. motives. 

We have two things to consider,—the principle and the opportuneness 
of the projected measure. 

The principle that the Allied Courts have decided for the 
hereditary right, I cannot call in question, taking as a rule the in- 
structions of the 15th of October, wherein it is mentioned; the Memo- 
randum of the 14th of November, which does not abrogate it, but on the 
contrary, recapitulates historically and substantially the paper of the 
15th of October; finally, the positive explanation given by Prince 
Metternich, and combined with more than one indication which supports 
it in the news of Europe, in the Parliamentary debates, and in the English 
papers. 

The opportuneness would be susceptible of a very extended discussion. 
It could not be exhausted within the limits of this letter. It will be suffi- 
cient for me to state, that struck as [ necessarily was by your doubts on this 
question, and reflecting, on the other hand, upon the grounds put 
forward by the Internuncio, I above all things applied myself, in concert 
with him, to making it clearly evident to Rechid Pasha how essential it 
is to avoid anything which might become decidedly inopportune, anything 
which might tend too far to commit for the future, or to be in contra- 
diction with the past. Thus, we have advised that if the Porte decides 
upon expediting the announcement of the hereditary right, this announce- 
ment should not be made formally in a fresh letter to Mehemet Ali, but 
simply in a supplementary and confidential instruction to Mazloum Bey: 
that this said mstruction should contain nothing resembling a gift of the 
hereditary right, but that it should be confined to promising it eventually, 
that is to say, after the strict and previous execution of all the stipula- 
tions necessary to prove the submission ;—that it should be expressly 
stated in the same document that the hereditary right will not be granted. 
except with conditions, the basis of which is already pointed out in the 
Separate Act of the 15th July, whilst the details thereof will be settled 
subsequently ;—that if the Porte decides upon sending this instruction 


191 


by a steamer appointed specially for that purpose, the ostensible object of 
its despatch should have nothing in common with the question of hereditary 
right ;—finally, that if this vessel should find that the Ottoman Com- 
missioners have either left Alexandria, or that they have been frustrated 
by the refusal of Mehemet Ali to obey the orders specified in the reply of 
the Grand Vizier, no use should be made of this supplementary instruc- 
tion, which should be brought back to Constantinople. It has seemed to 
me that the step, confined within such limits, would not be a deviation 
from the principles adopted here after the last Conference, and would in 
nowise weaken the rights which the Courts, parties to the Convention, 
have solemnly acknowledged to belong to the Sublime Porte. 

Not being in possession of any special instruction beyond that of 
regulating my language according to the decisions come to in London, 
and not having before me any official document which modifies what we 
know of those decisions, I would fain hope that your Excellency will find 
that my conduct is in conformity with the views which alone could direct 
me on this occasion. I attach too great a value to your opinion not to feel 
anxious to appear correct in your eyes. 

Hearing that an English messenger leaves this evening, may I beg 
you, my Lord, to take charge of the accompanying packet for London. 

His Majesty the Emperor has just given a sword adorned with 
precious stones to Selim Pasha, and the Second Class of the Order of 
St. Anne in diamonds to Admiral Walker as a reward for military exploits 
in Syria. This news has been very agreeable to me, and not doubting that 
it will be so to you also, my Lord, [ am happy to inform you of it. 

It only remains fer me in conclusion, &c., 

(Signed) TITOW. 


Inclosure 8 in No. 154. 


Viscount Ponsonby to M. Titow. 
My dear Sir, Therapia, January 9, 1841. 


BEFORE I received your letter of this day’s date, which reached 
Therapia between eleven and twelve o’clock at night, | had made my 
reply to Rechid Pasha on the subject that has occupied our attention, 
and I take the liberty of sending you a copy of it, thinking that it may 
be agreeable to you to know what I thought it my duty tosay. I hope 
you will think I have stated in the most explicit manner the grounds 
upon which I act, and the duty I have to perform, and that I have not 
used a single argument to deter the Sublime Porte from conforming to 
the measure proposed by the Internuncio, though I suppose my refusal 
to concur in giving advice may operate in some degree against the 
measure. 

Iam much grieved that I have been obliged to differ from my Col- 
leagues, and I have troubled you already with some of the reasons that 
make me persevere in the course I adopted; but there are other reasons 
which I have not stated, because they are founded upon the opinion I 
entertain as to the convenience and policy of the measure, which opinion 
may be very erroneous; whereas, there can be no doubt of my being right, 
when I am guided wholly by my own conviction of the nature of the duty 
I am to perform. 

I am exceedingly obliged to you for having taken the trouble to ex- 
plain to me your view of the subject: I might venture perhaps to offer 
some observations in reply, did I not suppose that the affair has been 
already settled by the opinion of the majority of my Colleagues. 

I thank you very much for the information you have given me of the 
new instances of the magnificent generosity with which His Imperial 
Majesty is accustomed to reward merit wherever it is found proved by 
the performance of service. 

I will forward with care your letter to London, but the messenger 
will not depart before to-morrow night. 

I beg, &c., 


(Signed) PONSONBY. 


——— anne 


\ 
ae Pe ee CP ep ee ee 


192 
Inclosure 9 in No. 154. 


Count Kenigsmarck to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Le 8 Janvier, 1841. 


JE viens de recevoir 4 l’instant méme le billet que votre Excellence 
a bien voulu m’écrire cette nuit. M. lInternonce m’a invité en effet a 
appuyer la demande qu’il a faite hier 4 la Porte, et d’aprés la teneur géné- 
rale de mes instructions, je crois devoir le faire, quoique plusieurs points 
me paraissent fortement parler en faveur des argumens de votre Excellence. 
M. de Stiirmer m’écrit que M. de Titow fera appuyer également la dé- 
marche ce matin par son Drogman, et il me semble qu’il importe de ne 
pas faire croire en Europe d’une divergence d’opinions entre nous, car il 
reste toujours au Sultan d’agir selon ses convenances. 

Je saisis, &c., 


(Signé) KGENIGSMARCK, 


(Translation.) 


My Lord, January 8, 1841. 
I HAVE this instant received the note your Excellency was so good as 
to write to me last night. The Internuncio has, in fact, invited me to sup- 
port the application which he yesterday made to the Porte, and according 
to the general tenour of my instructions I think I ought to do so, although 
many points appear to me to speak strongly in favour of your Excellency’s 
argument. M. de Stiirmer writes to me that M. de Titow will also cause 
the step to be supported this morning by his Dragoman, and it appears 
to me important not to let it be thought in Europe that there is a difference 
of opinion among us, for the Sultan has always the power of acting as he 
thinks fit. 
I avail myself, &c., 
(Signed) KCENIGSMARCK. 


Inclosure 10 in No. 154. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Count Kemgsmarck. 


Monsieur Je Comte, January 8, 1841. 


I HAVE just had the honour to receive your Excellency’s reply to 
my letter of last night. 

I regret that I cannot act with my Colleagues in this affair, without 
at the same time being wanting in. the obedience due to my Government. 
It will be very unpleasant to give occasion, as your Excellency observes 
to Europe, to suppose that there exists any difference of opinion amongst 
the Representatives of the Four Powers; but, if that opinion shall be 
created in Europe by what is now done, it is not to me that it can be 
justly attributed to be the cause. I act upon plain intelligible grounds 
which I have briefly stated to your Excellency, and I confess | have no 
proof or even comprehension of the necessity for proceeding with such 
breathless haste, and I cannot, without the existence of some reason that 
appears to be solid, deviate from the tenour of my instructions. It 
appears to me that there is no need for the measures recommended by 
his Excellency the Internuncio to be adopted, because whatever ig . 
granted to Mehemet Ali may be fully as well granted at the proper time 
and according to the plan decided upon by the British Government. 
Moved by these considerations, I have directed the British Dragoman 
to declare to the Sublime Porte that Iam not a party to this measure 
proposed by the Internuncio. 

_ Thave, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


LES LS LTT CS AE CLE, eS eT IE PN SST 


193. 
Inclosure 11 in No. 154. 
Message sent by Rechid Pasha, and brought by M. Etienne Pisani late in the day. 


(Extract.) Le 9 Janvier, 1841. 

1. QUE si la Porte consent a accorder l’hérédité 4 Méhémet Ali, que ce ne 
sera que sous des conditions, et pas dans une forme simple, comme on lui 
propose. 

2. Que des instructions seront données 4 Mazloum Bey de promettre 
Phérédité & Méhémet Ali s’il lui en parle, ou s'il s’apercoit que Méhémet Ali 
n’attend que cela pour remplir ses promesses. 

En conséquence, ce que Réchid Pacha désire savoir maintenant, c’est de 
savoir quelle conduite il doit tenir, et quelle doit étre la proposition a émettre 
dans le Conseil de ce soir, car sur la décision du Conseil sera bas¢e la réponse a 
donner aux Représentans. 


(Translation.) 
January 9, 1841. 

1. THAT if the Porte consents to grant the hereditary succession to Me- 
hemet Ali, it shall only be done conditionally, and not in a simple form, as 
is proposed to it. 

2. That instructions shall be given to Mazloum Bey to promise the 
hereditary right to Mehemet Ali if he speaks to him about it, or if he per- 
ceives that Mehemet only waits for that in order to fulfil his promises. 

Consequently, what Rechid Pasha wishes now to know, is, what line of 
conduct he should follow, and what proposal he should make in the Council 
to be held to-night, for the reply to be given to the Representatives will be 
founded upon the decision of the Council. 


Inclosure 12 in No. 154. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Rechid Pasha. 


Monsieur le Ministre, Therapia, January 9, 1841. 


I HAVE the honour to reply to your questions, by reference to what took 
place at the Conference held on the 20th of December, 1840, which, no doubt, 
is fresh in your recollection. 

I then said, that I had received orders from my Government to offer certain 
counsels to the Sublime Porte, in the name of the British Government, provided 
the Sublime Porte was satisfied with the submission of Mehemet Ali; and I 
stated that the counsel to be given, if the Sublime Porte were satisfied with the 
submission, would be counsel to grant the hereditary government of Egypt to 
Mehemet Ali upon certain conditions, which conditions I would detail at the 
time when I should be empowered to give the counsel; your Excellency stated, 
that the Sublime Porte was not. satisfied with the submission of Mehemet Ali; 
and it was agreed at the Conference that the Sublime Porte should take steps to 
satisfy itself of the true nature of the submission by an appeal to facts; and the 
Porte has sent Commissioners to effect that purpose. 

Whenever the Sublime Porte says that it is content with the submission 
made by Mehemet Ali, I am prepared to offer the counsel, as I have been com- 
manded to do by my Government, namely, to give Mehemet Ali the hereditary 
government of Egypt upon conditions, which conditions I shall then have the 
honour to specify in detail to the Sublime Porte. 

I am not at liberty to deviate from the line of my instructions as traced by 
my Government ; and I cannot be a party to any measure that is not in exact 
conformity with it; and I cannot give any counsel in the name of the British 
Government in any other way than that which has been prescribed in my instruc- 
ee I have, &c., 

(Signed) PONSONBY, 


ET ES ITY TET ENT LE ED 


2C 


Inclosure 13 in No. 154. 
Viscount Ponsonby to M. Titow, Baron Stiirmer, and Count Konigsmarck. 


My dear Sir, Therapia, January 10, 1841. 


I HASTEN to acquaint you, that in consequence of what I have received 
from my Government by the messenger who has just arrived here, I have 
instructed my Dragoman to inform his Excellency the Minister for Foreign 
Affairs, that the British Government advises the Sublime Porte to grant to 

Mehemet Ali the hereditary government of Egypt. 
; I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 14 in No, 154, 
Viscount Ponsonby to M. Frederick Pisani. 


Sir, Therapia, January 10, 1841. 

YOU will acquaint his Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs, that I 

am ordered to counsel the Sublime Porte, in the name of the British Govern- 
ment, to grant to Mehemet Ali the hereditary Government of Egypt. 
I have, &c., 

(Signed) PONSONBY. 


nec EE 


No. 155. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received February 8.) 


My Lord, Therapia, January 10, 1841. 

COLONEL HODGES communicated to me the papers of which I inclose 

copies. He may possibly have reported them to your Lordship, but I think them 

worth sending, as they may be considered (perhaps) a plan for obtaining a safe 

retreat for Ibrahim from Syria, which, if obtained, may put Mehemet Ali in a 
position in Egypt to refuse the conditions your Lordship intends to insist upon. 

J have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 155. 


(See Inclosure in No. 117.) 


Inclosure 2 in No. 155. 
(See Sub-Inclosure in No. 117.) 


No. 156. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.— (Received February 8.) 


My Lord, Therapia, January 13, 1841. 

{ HAVE the honour to inclose copy of instructions sent by the Sublime Porte 

to Mazloum Bey ; and a Hatti-Sheriff. These papers were sent late yesterday to 

the Dragoman, who translated them immediately, and has forwarded them to 

me. ) . 

{f there should be anything found in the mode of proceeding that is not in 

concurrence with your Lordship’s instructions to me, [ am not responsible for it, 
as I was not informed of it. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure ] in No. 156. 


Hatti-Sheriff communicated by Rechid Pasha to the Representatives of the 
Allied Courts. 


(Traduction.) Le 12 Janvier, 1841. 


J’AI pris connaissance du contenu de cette délibération du Conseil. 

Par déférence pour les conseils des Hautes Cours Alliées, et attendu que 
mon adhésion a Vhérédité dont il s’agit, met fin a la question, et contribue a la 
conservation de la paix générale, j’ai résolu de conférer de nouveau 4 Méhémet 
Ali Pacha le Gouvernement de Egypte, avec droit d’hérédité, lorsqu’il aura 
réellement fait sa soumission de la maniére que le Conseil l’a compris. 

Attendu que les instructions rédigées pour étre envoyées 4 Mazloum Bey, et 
renfermant la promesse formelle de lobjet en question, sont telles que la circon- 
stance l’exige, j’ordonne que l’on commence a agir conformément aux ordres 
qu’on m’a demandés. 

Il y a cependant ceci a dire: l’expérience du passé a prouvé la nécessité 
que notre Sublime Porte soit mise en parfaite sureté de la part de l’Egypte, soit 
pour a présent, soit pour lavenir; et ce but ne saurait guére étre atteimt qu’en 
attachant 4 Vhérédité des conditions fortes, des obligations nécessaires. Convaincu 
que la méme sollicitude bienveillante dont les Hautes Puissances Alliées ont déja 
donné des preuves, sera employée a cet effet aussi, je me suis empressé d’écouter 
leurs conseils et de les mettre 4 exécution. 

On donnera aux Quatre Représentans copie de ces instructions, et on les 
informera de ce qui a été dit plus haut. 

On mettra du zéle a faire ce qui est nécessaire. 


(Translation.) 


January 12, 1841. 


I HAVE taken cognizance of the contents of this deliberation of the 
Council. | 

From deference to the advice of the High Allied Courts, and seeing that 
my acquiescence in the hereditary succession in question, puts an end to the 
matter, and contributes to the preservation of the general peace, I have 
resolved to confer anew upon Mehemet Ali Pasha, the government of Egypt, 
with right of hereditary succession, when he shall really have made his sub- 
mission in the manner understood by the Council. 

Seeing that the instructions drawn up to be sent to Mazloum Bey, and 
containing the formal promise of the eae question, are such as are required 

2 


ee ee ee Te ae yee, Pee GU A Re 


196 


by circumstances, I direct that a commencement should be made of acting in 
conformity with the orders which have been requested of me. 

There is this, however, to be said: the experience of the past has proved 
the necessity of my Sublime Porte being placed in perfect security on the 
side of Egypt, both now and hereafter; and this object can scarcely be 
attained unless stringent conditions, necessary obligations, be attached to the 
hereditary succession. Convinced that the same benevolent solicitude, of which 
the High Allied Powers have already given proof, will be employed for this 
purpose also, I have hastened to listen to their advice, and to carry it into 
execution. bye tt 

Copy of these instructions shall be given to the Four Representatives, 
and they shall be informed of what has been said above. 

What is requisite is to be done with zeal. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 156. 


The Grand Vizier to Mazloum Bey.—(Communicated by Rechid Pasha to the 
Representatives of the Allied Courts.) 


i 19 Zilkadé, 1256 
(Traduction.) 12 Janvier, 1841. 


DANS la lettre que j’ai écrite et envoyée par votre Excellence 4 Son Altesse 
Méhémet Ali Pacha, il n’y a rien de clair ni de précis relativement 4 Vhérédité du 
Gouvernement del’Egypte. Ily est dit, en termes généraux, qu’il sera réintégré 
dans le Gouvernement de Egypte. II est donc probable, il est 4 présumer, que 
Son Altesse concevra des soup¢ons a cet égard ; et c’est pour cela qu’il a été jugé 
nécessaire de donner sur ce point les éclaircissemens qui suivent. 

Comme la lettre que Méhémet Ali Pacha m’a envoyée, et par laquelle il a 
offert sa soumission 4 Sa Majesté Impériale, commencait par faire mention de la 
Convention qui avait été faite entre lui et le Commodore Napier, et que la Sub- 
lime Porte n’avait pas accepté cette Convention, qu’elle regardait comme nulle et 
non-avenue, on a pensé que parler d’hérédité dans ma lettre ce serait, au fond, 
reconnaitre la Convention, et voila pourquoi on a omis d’en parler. 

Cependant, Sa Majesté Impériale, dont les bontés et les faveurs se répandent 
sur ses serviteurs véritablement soumis, ayant 4 Végard de Méhémet Ali Pacha 
des intentions bienveillantes qui sont en harmonie avec les sentimens de modéra- 
tion dont les Hautes Puissances Alliées sont animées, il est certain qu’aussitét 
qu'il aura prouvé par des faits, ainsi qu’il a été déclaré dans ma lettre, la soumis- 
sion qu'il a offerte, en restituant immédiatement la flotte Impériale, et en consig- 
nant, sans délai, les pays dont on sait qu’il est question, et qui sont situés hors de 
’Egypte, aux Commissaires de la Sublime Porte, Sa Hautesse daignera le réta- 
blir dans le Gouvernement de l’ Egypte, avec droit d’hérédité. 

On est aprés a établir les conditions nécessaires posées comme bases par le 
Traité d’ Alliance, et d’autres points qui se rattachent a ces conditions ; et comme 
tout cela sera arrangé en méme tems que l’investiture de Vhéredité aura lieu, je 
m/’abstiens d’entrer dans des détails & ce sujet pour le moment. Toutefois, il 
importe que Son Altesse sache en peu de mots ce dont il s’agit, et qu’on lui fasse 
surtout savoir d’avance, que si une seule des conditions qui auront été établies 
n’est pas observée, V’hérédité sera abolie. 

Vous ratifierez donc formellement, de la part de Sa Majesté Impériale, a 
Mchémet Ali, dans le cas ou, conformément a ce qui a été dit plus haut, sa sou- 
mission serait un fait, Vhérédité conditionnelle comme ci-dessus. Et SGnids dissi- 
per tout-a-fait les doutes qu’il pourrait avoir 4 cet égard, et lui inspirer une en- 
tiére confiance, vous lui ferez méme voir, au besoin, ma _ présente dépéche 
officielle. 

‘Tels sont les ordres du Sultan, conformément auxquels vous aurez soin 
@agir, et c’est a cette fin que je vous écris la présente, 


197 


(Translation.) 


19 Zilkadé, 1256 
12 January, 1841° 


IN the letter which I wrote and sent by your Excellency to his Highness 
Mehemet Ali Pasha, there is nothing clear or precise relative to the hereditary 
succession to the Government of Egypt. It is said, in general terms, that he 
shall be reinstated in the Government of Egypt. It is then probable, it is to 
be presumed, that his Highness will conceive suspicions in this respect; and 
it is for this reason that it has been judged necessary to give the following 
explanations upon this point. 

As the letter which Mehemet Ali Pasha sent to me, and by which he 
offered his submission to His Imperial Majesty, commenced by making mention 
of the Convention which had been concluded between him and Commodore 
Napier, and as the Sublime Porte had not accepted that Convention, which 
it regarded as null and of no effect, it was thought that if I had spoken in my 
letter of the hereditary succession, it would have been, in substance, to recognize 
the Convention, and that is the reason why it was omitted to speak of it. 

Nevertheless, His Imperial Majesty, whose goodness and favours are shed 
over his servants truly submissive, entertaining with regard to Mehemet Ali 
Pasha the benevolent intentions which are in unison with the sentiments of 
moderation by which the High Allied Powers are animated, it is certain that 
as soon as he shall have proved by facts, as has been declared in my letter, 
the submission which he has offered, by immediately restoring the Ottoman 
fleet, and by making over, without delay, to the Commissioners of the Sublime 
Porte, the countries which are known to be in question, and which are 
situated out of Egypt, His Highness will be pleased to re-instate him in the 
Government of Egypt, with right of hereditary succession. 

- The requisite conditions laid down by the Treaty of Alliance, and 
other points connected with those conditions, are about to be settled; and 
as all this will be arranged at the same time that the investiture of the here- 
ditary succession shal] take place, I abstain for the moment from entering into 
details upon this subject. 

However, it is important that his Highness should know in a few words 
what is doing, and that he should be apprized beforehand that if a single one 
of the conditions which shall have been laid down, is not observed, the 
hereditary succession will be abolished. 

You will therefore formally ratify to Mehemet Ali, on the part of His 
Imperial Majesty, in case that, in conformity with what has been said 
above, his submission shall be a fact, the conditional hereditary succession 
aforesaid. And in order altogether to dispel the doubts which he might have 
in this respect, and to inspire him with entire confidence, you will even 
allow him, if necessary, to see my present official despatch. 

Such are the orders of the Sultan, in conformity with which you will be 
careful to act, and it is for this purpose that I write to you the present 
despatch. 


INO Eas: 
Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, - Foreign Office, February 10, 1841. 


I HAVE received your Excellency’s despatch of the 10th of January, 
inclosing copies of your correspondence with your Colleagues, with reference to 
a proposal made by the Internuncio on the 7th of January, on the receipt of 
instructions from his Court, that the Plenipotentiaries of the Four Powers should 
concur in a representation to the Porte with the view of inducing the Sultan to 
grant to Mehemet Ali hereditary tenure of the Pashalic of Egypt; and also 
a copy of a message which, on the receipt of my despatch of the 17th 
of December, you sent to the Porte on the 10th of January, announcing that 


eh 


198 


you were instructed to advise the Porte to grant to Mehemet Ali the hereditary 
Government of Egypt; and I have to acquaint your Excellency that Her 
Majesty’s Government approve the course you took with reference to the matter 
in question. 
I am, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


tat al i has Sih a Bn mt 
No. 158. 


Sir John Barrow to J. Backhouse, Esq. 


Sips he" Admiralty, February 10, 1841. 


I AM commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to trans- 
mit to you, for the information of Viscount Palmerston, the inclosed copy of a 
letter from Commodore Sir Charles Napier, dated 21st ultimo, transmitting the 
copy of his letter and its inclosures to Admiral the Honourable Sir Robert 
Stopford, reporting his proceedings at Alexandria. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) JOHN BARROW. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 158. 


Commodore Napier to R. More O’ Ferrall, Esq. 


Her Majesty's Ship ‘‘ Carysfort,” 
Sir, Alexandria, January 21, 1841. 

I HAVE the honour to inclose the copy of a letter* to Sir R. Stopford, 
reporting my proceedings at Alexandria up to the 1]th instant, together with 
copies of my letters to the Senior Naval and Military Officers in Syria, Lieu- 
tenant Loring’s instructions, and Boghos Bey’s letter to me. 

I now beg to acquaint you for their Lordships’ information, that the Pasha 
has most religiously fulfilled all he promised, and has acted altogether in the 
most liberal manner in equipping, provisioning, and paying the Turkish squadron, 
the last of which sailed this morning for Marmorice. 

Sir Baldwin Walker deserves great credit for his indefatigable exertions in 
getting them out; many of them were obliged to lighten, even to their ballast, and 
take in their guns and stores outside, which they did without anchoring, and 
were clear of the land before sunset. 

I also inclose a copy of a letter to Boghos Bey on the subject of the sale of 
cotton and the Commercial Convention of August, 1838. 

Relative to the cotton, the Pasha immediately fixed the price at 13 dollars 
the kintar, to be paid on delivery ; and he promised to carry out the Convention, 
to abolish all monopolies throughout Egypt, and to turn his attention to the 
ameliorating the condition of the people. 

I called his attention to the system practised by his Government of making 
the villages answerable for each other paying the contribution, and even each 
inhabitant answerable for his neighbour. All of which he admitted to be bad 
and added, he had not had time to turn his attention to it before. 

I also recommended him to encourage as much as possible the establish- 


_ ment of newspapers, in order that all abuses might come to his ears. 


He observed that he had always wished to gain the good-will of England 
but without success, and he was now ready to do everything she wished. 

He is under the impression that Great Britain is opposed to him either 
cutting a canal through the isthmus or establishing a railroad. On this point 
I could give him no positive opinion, but I feel quite certain he will do anything 
we wish in reason, and would become our vassal if we required it. 


* Sub-Inclosure 1 in No. 147, 
+ Inclosure 2 in No. 178. 


I inclose a copy of Boghos Bey’s reply to me on the subject of the Con- 

vention. I[ did not think it reasonable to push him further. 
_ The army left Damascus on the 29th of December, in three columns; there 
is areport that there has been an affair at Jaffa, but I trust it is not serious, 
and that the officer in command there will give every: facility to Ibrahim’s 
retreat. 

Letters have been received from Constantinople, stating that the Porte had 
conceded the hereditary Pashalic to Mehemet Ali. 

I beg to congratulate their Lordships and the Government on the final 
termination of this contest, which threatened to put Europe in a blaze, and 
which it would have required, at least, half the water in the Mediterranean to 
have extinguished. 

; I have, &c., 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER, — 


Commodore. 


January 23.—IYbrahim Pasha has arrived safe at Gaza, and Solyman at 
Suez; Mehemet Ali says with 60,000 troops, 10,000 of which are irregular. 

The steam-boat has not yet returned from Syria, so that I do not know 
where the women, children, and sick have been left. 

We hear there is great disorder in Arabia since the Pasha withdrew his 
troops. 

In a long conversation I had yesterday with him, he said he hoped two or 
three years would prove that the policy of the Allies depriving him of Syria 
and his other possessions had been good, but he much doubted it. 

Admiral Walker sailed this morning. 


Sub-Inclosure 1 in No. 158. 
Commodore Napier to Lreutenant Loring. 


Her Majesty’s Ship “‘ Carysfort,” 
Sir, Alevandria, January 10, 1841. 

PURSUANT to directions from the Commander-in-Chief, you will accom- 
pany Hamid Bey in the Egyptian steam-boat to the coast of Syria. 

You will recommend him first to proceed to Acre, and you will deliver the 
accompanying letter to the officer commanding the Allied forces. 

You will consult with him as to the best way of proceeding to Ibrahim 
Pasha’s head-quarters, and you will demand a proper escort (if necessary) for 
your own protection and that of the Egyptian officer bearing the despatches to 
Ibrahim Pasha. 

The object of your mission to Ibrahim Pasha’s head-quarters, is to see the 
evacuation of Syria carried into effect, and you will stay with Ibrahim Pasha as 
long as you consider it necessary, and then return to Alexandria. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER, 


Commodore. 


Sub-Inclosure 2 in No. 158. 
Commodore Napier to Boghos Bey. 


Her Majesty’s Ship “‘ Carysfort,” 
Sir, Alexandria, January 14, 1841. 
WITH reference to the conversation I had the honour of holding with your 
Excellency this morning, relative to the notice you had issued of the intention 
of selling the crop of cotton of 1840, on the 20th of February, and continuing 
the sale the lst of every succeeding month; I beg to observe to your Excellency, 


200 
that several of the British merchants complain of the difficulty they have 
of becoming purchasers. They allege, that if they import cash to purchase 
this cotton, the price may be put so high, that they will either be obliged to 
take it at a loss, or re-export their specie. ‘They have, in consequence, re- 
quested me to suggest to your Excellency that the cotton in question may be 
put up at public sale, where it is sure to fetch its real value, and the merchants 
will then have a fair chance of becoming purchasers. This is the system 
invariably followed by the East India Company, and they have always found it 
to answer their purpose and satisfy the public. } 

I take this opportunity of asking your Excellency whether it is his High- 
ness’s intention to execute the Commercial Treaty of the 16th of August, 
1838. 

Your Excellency must be aware that the British Government will insist on 
its being put into immediate operation, and I feel quite certain, if his Highness 
will allow it at once to take its course, he will not only gain many friends in 
England, but it will also engage Lord Palmerston more strongly to push the 
point of the hereditary government. 

As I had the honour of signing the Convention of the 27th of November, 
which has been approved of with the exception of the guarantee, I feel myself 
bound in honour to do all in my power to have it fulfilled, and I am desirous of 
being furnished with arguments to show the British Government that it is to 
their interest to, if possible, see it fully carried out ; and no argument that i can 
make use of will weigh more than being able to write to Lord Palmerston that 
the Commercial Convention is in full operation. 

Permit me to express to your Excellency how pleased I am on seeing the 
loyal manner in which his Highness has acted throughout the whole affair of 
the evacuation of Syria and the delivery of the fleet, and I trust it will have its 
due weight at Constantinople. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER, 


Commodore. 


Sub-Inclosure 3 in No. 158. 


Boghos Joussouf to Commodore Napier. 


Monsieur le Commodore, Alexandrie, le 18 Janvier, 1841. 


APRES vous avoir instruit, M. le Commodore, que j’avais porté a la con- 
naissance du Viceroi mon Maitre la lettre amicale que vous m’avez écrite le 14 
de ce mois, j’ai eu l’honneur de vous accompagner ce matin chez:Son Altesse, et 
dans l’entretien téte-a-téte qui a eu lieu, vous avez pu, M. le Commodore, yous 
convaincre de la loyauté de ses sentimens et de sa conduite. Tous les moyens 
disponibles ont été mis a la disposition de l Amiral Yaver Pacha pour faciliter la 
sortie du port a la flotte Ottomane, qui se trouve préte a prendre la mer; la 
retraite des troupes Egyptiennes s’etfectue en Syrie; les garnisons de Candie, 
d’Arabie, et des Lieux Saints n’attendent que l’arrivée des forces destinées 2 les 
remplacer pour maintenir la tranquillité de ces pays. 

Quant au commerce, Son Altesse, qui veut y donner tous ses soins confor-. 
mément aux désirs exprimés, elle en a été empéchée jusqu’d ce jour par les 
occupations de la guerre. Dans peu de jours elle se rendra dans les provinces 
pour mirir des arrangemens, qui, sans violentes secousses pour l’administration 
du pays, la mettent en état de satisfaire au Traité auquel elle a acquiescé. Le 
Viceroi compte donc qu’on lui accordera le tems indispensable pour que cette 
transition puisse s’effectuer au gré de tous. 

Jal, SC. 
(Signé) BOGHOS JOUSSOUF. 


(Translation.) 


M. le Commodore, Alexandria, January 18, 1841. 


AFTER having informed you, M. le Commodore, that I had made 
known to the Viceroy my master the friendly letter which you wrote to me 
on the 14th of this month, I had the honour to accompany you this morning 
to his Highness, and in the conversation which ensued, you have been 


ee Re TEU PPD eT wy 


201 


enabled to convince yourself, M. le Commodore, of the sincerity of his senti- 
ments and conduct. All the means we possess have been placed at the 
disposal of the Admiral Yaver Pasha to facilitate the departure of the 
Ottoman fleet, which is ready to put to sea; the retreat of the Egyptian 
troops is being carried into effect in Syria; the garrisons in Candia, Arabia, 
and the Holy Cities, only await the arrival of the forces destined to replace 
them, in order to maintain the tranquillity of these countries. 

With regard to commerce, his Highness, who is desirous to dedicate to 
it all his care in conformity with the desire which has been expressed, has 
been hitherto prevented from doing so by the occupations of the war. In a 
few days he will proceed to the Provinces to complete such arrangements as 
may, without a violent shock to the administration of the country, put him 
in a position to fulfil the conditions of the Treaty to which he has given his 
acquiescence. ‘The Viceroy trusts that the time will be granted him, which 
is indispensable to enable this change to be effected to the satisfaction of all. 


I have, &c., 
(Signed) BOGHOS JOUSSOUF. 
No. 159. 


Sir John Barrow to J. Backhouse, Esq. 


Sir, | Admiralty, February 28, 1841. 


I AM commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to send 
you herewith, for the information of Viscount Palmerston, a copy of a letter 
from Admiral Sir Robert Stopford, stating, that he considers his mission in the 
Levant to have terminated, and that he intends to proceed to Malta, leaving 
Rear- Admiral Sir John Ommaney in command of the squadron at Marmorice. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) JOHN BARROW. 


Inclosure in No. 159. 
Admiral Stopford io R. More O’ Ferrall, Esq. 


“ Princess Charlotte,” 
Sir, Marmorice, January 26, 1841. 


YOU will be pleased to acquaint my Lords Commissioners of the Admi- 
ralty, that after having seen the arrival of the Turkish fleet in this harbour 
from Alexandria, on their passage to the Dardanelles as soon as the season 
permits, having also received intelligence that Solyman Pasha, commanding the 
advanced guard of Ibrahim Pasha’s army, had arrived at Suez, and that Ibrahim 
Pasha was at Gaza on his route into Egypt, I consider my mission in the 
Levant to have terminated, and shall proceed to Malta, leaving Rear- Admiral 
Sir John Ommaney here with the command of the ships named in the margin’, 
until their Lordships’ further orders. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) ROBERT STOPFORD, 
Admiral. 


No. 160. 
Brigadier-General Michell to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received February 14, 1841.) 


My Lord, Acre, December 31, 1840. 


AS yet there has been no direct communication with England or with. 
Malta, nor have any means been afforded me of sending to your Lordship a 
satisfactory despatch with regard to the affairs of Syria. 


* Britannia. Powerful, Revenge. Rodney. Howe. Vanguard. Castor. Calcutta. 
Benbow. Cambridge. Dido. Daphne. Magicienne. ‘Talbot. Wasp. Vesuvius, Hecaie. 
Stromboli. Hazard. 


2D 


202° 


On the departure of Sir Charles Smith the Sultan’s commission was. 
delivered to General Jochmus, and a few days afterwards he lett Beyrout for: 
Sidon, and proceeded thence with some light cavalry to Hasbeya in the hill: 
country on the Upper Jordan, for the purpose of giving encouragement and 
direction to the mountaineers, and of obtaining accurate intelligence concerning 
the Egyptian Army. Bs é 

The most vague and conflicting accounts were arriving daily as to the 
intentions of Ibrahim Pasha. He had concentrated his forees about Damascus, 
and the general belief was that he would immediately commence his retreat to 
Egypt. 
Gielen Jochmus, notwithstanding his nearer approach to Damascus, has 
been still kept in doubt as to what is going on there; but he seemis to be fully 
of opinion that Ibrahim Pasha is about to move, and that he will, if possible, 
retreat on Gaza. His proposal, therefore, is to cause the Egyptian Army to be 
harassed on its flanks and rear by the mountain levies, and having assembled the 
regular Turkish troops at points along the coast, to operate with them as occasions 
may offer,in the defiles between the Jordan and the coast. In the mean time General 
Jochmus has been very desirous of attacking Gaza, and of capturing or destroy- 
ing the provisions which are said to be in store there for the Egyptian Army, and 
he has repeatedly urged my co-operation for this purpose with men-of-war or 
steamers on the coast. ‘There have been, however, and are still, many diffi- 
culties opposed to such an undertaking. The whole of the fleet had taken 
shelter at Marmorice, leaving only one steamer to watch the wreck of the 
‘‘ Zebra” in tue Bay of Acre, besides the ‘‘ Hecate,” which brought me to 
Beyrout; yet three lrench vessels, a corvette, and two brigs of war, remained 
upon the coast and were generaliy at anchor near Beyrout. I took the earliest 
opportunity of making this known to the Admiral, Sir Robert Stopford, and 
he most kindly and promptly sent Captain Houston Stewart with the ‘ Benbow,” 
seventy-two, and the ‘‘ Hazard” sloop. They arrived on the 24th of December, 
but the heavy surf prevented their communication with the shore, and it was 
not until the 27th that I could get the detachments of artillery and sappers, 
which came from England in the “‘ Hecate,” disembarked at Acre. In the mean 
time, however, Lieutenant-Colonel Colquhoun of the Artillery, and Lieutenant- 
Colonel Alderson of the Engineers, had made a visit to that fortress, and likewise 
to Tyre and Sidon. 

The Admiral, while he sent me this naval aid, expressed a great unwiiling- 
ness to have it employed against Gaza or in any offensive operations ; first, on 
account of the storms prevailing at this season; secondly, because the nego- 
tiations opened by Captain Fanshawe were still pending, and he had consented 
to a request, made by the Pasha of Egypt, Mehemet Ali, that Egyptian steamers 
might go off Gaza to embark the sick, the women, and the children, of Ibrahim 
Pasha’s Army, for Alexandria. 

Captain Houston Stewart had instructions from the Admiral based upon 
these reasons ; and they of course weighed also with me as to any operations 
against Gaza; besides I had received information of the Egyptian force there, 
and at [‘l-Arish, having been largely reinforced; but knowing that General 
Jochmus had directed a corps to be detached from Acre to that part of the 
country, I determined to attempt some observations upon the coast, and on 
the z9th proceeded in the “ Hecate’’ steamer from Beyrout to Acre ; Captain 
Stewart kindly consenting to accompany me, and ordering the ‘‘ Hazard” sloop 
to follow, but leaving his own ship the ‘ Benbow” at anchor near Beyrout. 
We reached Acre in the evening, and having communicated with Lieutenant- 
Colonel Colquhoun and with the Turkish General Selim Pasha, re-embarked and 
pursued our course to the southward with the intention of visiting Jaffa and of 
reconnoitring Ascalon and the coast near Gaza; but on the morning of the 
30th, a gale of wind prevented our further progress, and we were compelled to 
return to the anchorage off Caiffa near Mount Carmel. In the course of the day 
the ‘‘ Hazard” sloop appeared, but Captain Stewart, apprehending for her, if she 
came to anchor, the fate of the ‘* Zebra,” whose wreck lay near us, ordered her 
back by telegraph to Beyrout. 

‘This morning we were enabled to steam across the bay, and land at Acre; 
but the gale is renewed at intervals, and we must for the present relinquish all 
idea of landing Marines or Artillery upon the coast. Captain Stewart returns 


203 


this evening in the ‘‘ Hecate” to Beyrout, leaving the ‘ Vesuvius ” with me- 
That steamer conveyed some ammunition on the 29th to Jaffa for Omar Pasha, 
the Turkish General, who has made: the movement towards Gaza. His corps is 
however too small to attack that place, and he will probably limit his operations 
to a removal of the provisions from Ramla, and other points in the line of the 
Egyptian Army’s retreat, to Jerusalem or to Jaffa. In fact he has now expressed 
a wish that the enemy’s attention may not for the present be drawn towards him 
by a descent upon the coast. Ihave directed Colonel Rose to accompany Omar 
Pasha, aud to keep me acquainted with his movements. 

Your Lordship will doubtless learn from Sir Charles Smith a full account 
of Acre, of the breaches made during the bombardment and by the explosion 
of a.magazine, of the immediate repairs which he ordered to protect the place 
from a coup-de-main, and of his views as to a more extensive and permanent 
restoration of the works. Considering the very limited means and _ resources, 
personal or material, left in Acre, the progress made in executing Sir Charles 
Smith’s orders has been as much as could be expected, but a great deal remains 
to be performed, and Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson will now charge himself with 
the direction of the works, whilst Lieutenant-ColonelColquhoun will superintend, 
in. concert with the Turkish Artillery, the arming of the batteries. 

I regret to inform your Lordship that the small Marine Battalion which has 
been stationed at Acre since its capture, has suffered much from sickness, the Com- 
mandant Lieutenant-Colonel Walker and thirty-one men having died in the course 
of about six weeks. ‘This is full one tenth or their total number. Whether the 
mortality has been occasioned by their previous exposure and privations during 
the operations on the cvast, or by any cause of insalubrity in Acre, I have not 
yet been able to ascertain. There is reason to believe the sickness is now on the 
decrease. ‘The two Assistant Surgeons lent by Sir Robert Stopford, from the 
fleet, and who had been attacked by the malady, are recovering. Another has 
been added, and I hope the arrangements I have this day ordered as to a venti- 
lation and improvement of the quarters, and as to the establishment of a Con- 
valescent Hospital in an airy situation outside the town, will restore the bat- 
talion to comparative health. 

Nothing has been seen of the Egyptian steamers from Alexandria, to 
receive the sick of Ibrahim Pasha’s Army. When that permission was given 
by Captain Fanshawe, it was supposed the Army was already on its march to 
Gaza, and not likely to linger at Damascus. Probably Ibrahim Pasha delays his 
movement from that city, now, in consequence of the Convention commenced 
with his father by Captain Fanshawe. Our situation will be very embarrassing 
until the negotiations are terminated, since any act of hostility on our part may 
be construed into a breach of faith, and may disturb arrangements half con- 
cluded. Iam, therefore, anxiously expecting orders from Lord Ponsonby upon 
the subject. In the meantime his Excellency’s latest instructions to General 
Jochmus, and upon which he is prepared and resolved to act with energy, dictate 
‘a continuance of offensive operations. . 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) EDWARD MICHELL, 
Brigadier- General. 


No. 161. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmersten.—(Received February 14.) 


My Lord, Therapia, January 21, 1841. 
THE Internuncio has been so good as to communicate to me the papers of 
which I have the honour to inclose. copies. 
I have, &c., 
(Sizned) PONSONBY. 


—— CO hI a il a ik ell il ll en ee 


204 


{nclosure 1 in No. 161. 


M. Steindl to Baron de Sttirmer. 


M. le Baron, Jaffa, le 10 Janvier, 1841. 


PAR mon dernier rapport en date du 2 de ce mois j’ai eu Vhonneur 
de porter & la connaissance de votre Excellence qu’Ibrahim Pacha ayant évacué 
Damas, et s’étant retiré sur Mézérib, d’ou il aurait pu forcer le passage sur 
Gaza, toujours occupé par Mahmoud Bey et quelques autres officiers Supérieurs 
Egyptiens, avec 3,000 hommes de Cavalerie et neuf canons, les Alliés avaient 
décidé de transférer le quartier-général 4 St. Jean d’ Acre. ' 

Cette place forte n’étant aucunement menacée par l’ennemi, et se trouvant 
encore trop éloignée du chemin qu’Ibrahim Pacha prendrait avec ses troupes 
pour rentrer en Egypte, s'il ne voulait pas se résigner a se retirer par le désert, 
oti la poursuite serait aussi pénible que dangereuse et inutile, le Général Michell, 
Zékria Pacha, et les autres Généraux Turcs, décidérent de réunir toutes les 
troupes dans le voisinage de Jaffa, et d’y établir le quartier-général, ce qui fut 
mis 4 exécution sans perte de tems. Mais il parait qu’on ne s’arrétera pas 
encore dans cette derniére ville; une brigade, commandée par Ismael Pacha, 
partit hier soir pour Ramlé et Jérusalem, et il est plus que probable que cette 
derniére ville soit choisie comme centre des opérations et quartier-général, ce qui 
est d’autant plus désirable que Jaffa est trop petite pour contenir le gros de 
Varmée en hiver ; les soldats ne pouvant guére, sans risquer de tomber malades, 
étre mis sous des tentes. | 

Le Général Jochmus, escorté d’une centaine de cavaliers Turcs, continuait 
en attendant a parcourir les montagnes de la Naplouse, et les districts situés 
entre le Jourdan et le Haouran, pour réunir autant de montagnards et paysans 
que possible. J] en forma plusieurs corps, dont il confia le commandement a 
MM. Dumont et Comte Szechenyi, ses Aides-de-camp, pour harceler Ibrahim 
Pacha pendant sa retraite, tandis qu’il ordonna & Omar Pacha, stationné avec 
2,500 hommes a Ramlé, de se réunir avec une partie des garnisons de Jaffa et de 
Jérusalem, et de tenter un coup de main sur Gaza, pour y incendier les provi- 
sions considérables que Méhémet Ali y avait fait transporter pour faciliter la 
retraite de l’armée de son fils sur cette route. 

Les Anglais désavouérent hautement cette attaque, d’aprés ce qu’il parait 
moins parcequ’ils désespéraient de la réussite, que parceque |’Amiral Stopford 
avait désigné a Méhémet Ali cette ville comme l’endroit ot les Egyptiens 
devraient se concentrer pour étre embarqués pour Alexandrie, en cas qu’un 
arrangement entre le Sultan et son vassal pourrait se combiner. C’est pourquoi 
Réchid Mchémed Pacha, nommé Chef d’Etat-Major du quartier-général, fut 
expédié le 5 de ce mois de St. Jean d’Acre 4 Thébériade auprés du Général 
Jochmus avec ordre de l’engager 4 se rendre A Jaffa pour assister 4 un grand 
conseil de guerre, tandis que le méme ordre fut envoyé par un Tatar 4 Omer 
Pacha, avec défense d’attaquer Gaza. Le Général Jochmus est arrivé ici dans 
la journée Vhier, laissant toujours ses Aides-de-camp & la téte des paysans armés. 

Dans la soirée d’hier on recut la nouvelle positive qu’Ibrabim Pacha avait 
quitté Mézérib lui-méme avec le reste de son armée, et qu’il avait pris le chemin 
du désert. M. Dumont le poursuit avec un corps de Bédouins, dans l’espoir 
de séparer de lui son arriére-garde, et de lui enlever quelques canons, des 
vivres, et des munitions. M. le Comte de Szechenyi est attendu ici sous peu 
de jours. 

Un bateau 4 vapeur Anglais, arrivé hier soir de Marmorizza avec des 
dépéches de l’Amiral Stopford pour le Général Michell, a apporté la nouvelle 
que Sa Hautesse le Sultan avait agréé la soumission de Méhémet Ali, et que 
VAmiral Walker était parti de Constantinople pour Alexandrie avec quelques 
officiers de marine Turcs pour ramener dans le Bosphore la flotte du Sultan. On 
nous annonce en méme tems Varrivée prochaine des ordres de Constantinople 
pour suspendre les hostilités, 

Agréez, &c., 
(Signé) A. STEINDL. 


205° 


(Translation.) 


M. le Baron, Jaffa, January 10, 1841. 


BY my last report, dated the 2nd of this month, I had the honour to 
acquaint your Excellency that Ibrahim Pasha having evacuated Damascus, and 
having retired upon Mezerib, from whence he might have been able to force his 
way to Gaza, which was still occupied by Mahmoud Bey and some other superior 
officers of the Egyptians, with 3,000 cavalry and nine guns, the Allies had 
decided upon transferring the head. quarters to St. Jean d’Acre. 

This fortress being in no degree threatened by the enemy, and being still 
too far distant from the road which Ibrahim Pasha would take with his troops on 
his return to Egypt, if he should not choose to resign himself to retreat by the 
desert, where the pursuit would be as difficult as it would be dangerous and 
useless, General Michell, Zechariah Pasha, and the other Turkish Generals, 
decided upon concentrating all the troops in the neighbourhood of Jaffa, and 
there fixing the head-quarters, which was carried into effect without loss of time. 
But it appears that they will not stay even in this latter city; a brigade, com- 
manded by Ismael Pasha, set out yesterday evening for Ramla and Jerusalem, 
and it is more than probable that this last city will be chosen as the centre of 
operations and head-quarters, which is the more desirable, as Jaffa is too small to 
contain the main body of the army in winter; it being scarcely possible to put 
the soldiers under tents without risk of their becoming sick. 

General Jochmus, escorted by 100 Turkish Cavalry, continued in the mean 
time to traverse the mountains of the Naplouse and the districts situated between 
the Jordan and the Haouran, in order to assemble as many mountaineers as 
possible. He formed several corps of them, the command of which he entrusted 
to M. Dumont and Count Szechenyi, his aides-de-camp, for the purpose of 
harassing Ibrahim Pasha during his retreat, whilst he ordered Omer Pasha, who 
was stationed at Ramla with 2,500 men, to form a junction with a portion of the 
garrisons of Jaffa and of Jerusalem, and to attempt a sudden attack upon Gaza, in 
order there to burn the considerable magazines of provisions which Mehemet Ali 
had caused to be transported thither to facilitate the retreat of his son’s army by 
that road. 

The English loudly disavowed this attack, less, as it appears, because they 
despaired of success, than because Admiral Stopford had indicated to Mehemet 
Ali that town as the place where the Egyptians sheuld concentrate themselves to 
be embarked for Alexandria, in case an arrangement could be brought about 
between the Sultan and his vassal. For this purpose, Rechid Mehemed Pasha, 
appointed Chief of the Staff at head-quarters, was sent on the Sth instant from 
St. Jean d’Acre to Tiberias to General Jochmus, with orders to invite him to. 
proceed to Jaffa to be present at a great council of war, whilst the same order 
was sent by Tatar to Omer Pasha, with a prohibition against attacking Gaza. 
General Jochmus arrived here in the course of yesterday, still leaving his aides- 
de-camp at the head of the armed peasantry. 

Yesterday evening positive news was received that Ibrahim Pasha had him- 
self left Mezerib with the rest of his army, and that he had taken the desert 
road. M. Dumont is in pursuit of him with a corps of Bedouins, hoping to 
separate his rear-guard from him and to carry off from him some cannon, pro- 
visions, and ammunition. The Count Szechenyi is expected here in a few 
days. ; ; : 

An English steam-vessel, which arrived yesterday evening from Marmorice 
with despatches from Admiral Stopford for General Michell, brought the news 
that His Highness the Sultan had accepted the submission of Mehemet Ali, and 
that Admiral Walker had left Constantinople for Alexandria with some officers of 
the Turkish Navy to bring back the Sultan’s fleet to the Bosphorus. The early 
artival of orders from Constantinople for the suspension of hostilities is 
announced to us at the same time. 

Receive, &c., 


(Signed) A. STEINDL. 


Inclosure 2: in No. 161. 


Notizie Uffiziale giunte a Marmorice il giorno 13 Gennaro, 1841, vol Vapore 
Inglese “ Gorgon,” proveniente de Giaffa, Quartier Generale del? Armata 
Ottomana, fino al giorno 10 corrente. 


NEI ultimi giorni di Dicembre fu organizzata la leva in massa di tutti gli 
abitanti della Siria al sud di Beiruth e Damasco. I montanari sotto le armi sono 
calcolati a 15,000 uomini compresi quelli del Hauran. 

Li 27 Dicembre tutti i viveri e foraggi che Ibrahim Pascia aveva radunato 
in un posto avanzato a quasi due giorni in ostro di Damasco, e che dovevano 
servire nella sua ritirata per la Palestina e Gazza, furono presi dai montanari. 

Li 29 Dicembre Ibrahim evacud Damasco. Gli disertarono 2,000 uomini 
di Cavalleria Curdi, com diversi corpi d’Artigleria e d’Infanteria Irregolare. 

Li 2 Gennaro Ibrahim si ritird per El Kessne, ed occupd El Mezerib, inse- 
guito da 2,000 uomini di Cavalleria leggiera sotto gli ordini del Capitano de l’Or, 
Ajutante di Campo del Generale Jochmus. L’armata Egiziana softre delle grande 
perdite colle continue diserzioni e dal rigore della stagione. 

Li3 e 4 Gennaro Ibrahim rimase a El Mezerib per organizzare le sue 
truppe e convogli. Il suo piano di ritirata di voler traversare la Palestina per 
Djouni e Ramla verso la costa, venne deluso dall’ Emir Bechir, soppragiunto con 
7,000 uomini e 1,500 Cavaleggieri. 

Tiberiade ed i defile di Djouni sono occupati dai montanari di Nauplusa, 
mentre l’armata regolare Ottomana, composta di ventotto battaglioni, occupa 
tutta la linea da Sidone al Monte Carmello, tenendo pure una guarnigione a 
Gerusalemme. 

Li 5 Gennaro Ibrahim comincié la sua marcia pel deserto per la strada 
della caravana verso Maan e Suez. La sua forza era apparentemente ridotta a 
15,000 uomini d’Infanteria e 5,000 di Cavalleria, ed un parco d’Artigleria di 
circa cento pezze. Egli aveva molti ammalati. 

Il figlio del Governatore di Gerusalemme, col primo Tenente Austriaco Du- 
mont, furono spediti a sollevare i Beduini di Gebil Chalil (Monte Hebron) 
e quelli del deserto, collo scopo di distruggere i foraggi e le provigioni a Maan ad 
otto giorni di marcia dal deserto. 

Un corpo di Cavalleria di 3,000 Egiziani mandato da Mehemet Ali da El 
Haris é ancora stabilito in ostro di Gazza. Queste truppe subitocché sapranno 
che Ibrahim Pascia si ritira pel deserto e non per la Palestina, ritorneranno ancor 
esse ben probabilmente in Egitto. 

I] giorno 9 Gennaro tutto il Quartier Generale Brittanico ed Ottomano era 
stabilito a Giaffa, ove si trovavano il Serraschiere Zecaria Pascia ed il Generale 
Jochmus. 

I 8.8, Tenente Colonnello Philippovitch, MaggiorePott, e gli altri tre uffiziali 
suol compagni, erano parimente a Giaffa presso il Generale in Capo. 

L’armata Ottomana al 9 Gennaro occupava Acre, Gerusalemme, defile di 
Djouni, Giaffa, e Ramla. 

Le truppe Ottomane che vennero dall’ Asia Minore, traversando il Tauro o 
l’Eufrate, sono in movimento verso il sud, parte per la via di Baalbec, e parte 
tungo la costa per Tripoli e Beiruth verso Acre. 


(Translation.) 


IN the last days of December, the levy en masse of all the inhabitants of 
Syria to the south of Beyrout and Damascus was organized. The mountaineers 
under arms are estimated at 15,000 men, including those of the Haouran. 

On the 27th of December, all the provisions and forage which Ibrahim 
Pasha had collected in an advanced post about ten days to the south of Damascus, 
and which were to have served in his retreat by Palestine and Gaza, were cap- 
tured by the mountaineers. 

On the 29th of December, Ibrahim evacuated Damascus. Two thousand 
oe cavalry, with variou$ bodies of artillery and irregular infantry, deserted 

rom him, 


On the 2nd of January, Ibrahim retreated by El Kessne, and occupied E] 


207 


Mezerib, pursued by 2,000 light cavalry under the orders of Captain de ]’Or,- 
aide-de-camp of General Jochmus. ‘The Egyptian army suffers great loss from 
continued desertions, and from the severity of the season. 

Ibrahim remained at El Mezerib on the 3rd and 4th of January, in order to 
organize his troops and convoys. His plan of retreat, according to which he 
wished to traverse Palestine by Djounie and Ramla to the coast, has been frustrated 
by the Emir Bechir, who has joined with 7,000 men and 1,500 light cavalry. 

Tiberiada and the defiles of Djounie are occupied by the mountaineers of 
Naplouse while the regular Ottoman army, consisting of twenty-eight battalions, 
occupies the whole line from Sidon to Mount Carmel, maintaining, nevertheless, 
a garrison at Jerusalem, , 

On the 5th of January, Ibrahim commenced his march through the Desert 
by the caravan-road towards Maan and Suez. His force was apparently reduced 
to 15,000 infantry and 5,000 cavalry, and a park of artillery of about 100 guns: 
He had many sick. 

The son of the Governor of Jerusalem, with the Austrian Lieutenant Dumont, 
were despatched to raise the Bedouins of Gebel Chalil (Mount Hebron), and 
those of the Desert, with the view of destroying the forage and provisions at Maan, 
eight days’ march from the Desert. 

A body of 3,000 Egyptian cavalry, despatched by Mehemet Ali from El 
Arish, is still stationed to the south of Gaza. ‘These troops, as soon as they shall 
know that Ibrahim Pasha is returning by the Desert, and not through Palestine, 
will likewise very probably again return to Egypt. 

On the 9th of January, the whole of the British and Ottoman head-quarters 
were established at Jaffa, where were the Seraskier Zechariah Pasha and General 
Jochmus. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Philippovitch, Major Pott, and the three other officers, 
their companions, were likewise at Jaffa with the General-in-Chief. 

The Ottoman army, on the 9th of January, occupied Acre, Jerusalem, the 
defiles of Djounie, Jaffa, and Ramla. 

The Ottoman troops which came from Asia Minor, crossing the Taurus or 
the Euphrates, are in motion towards the south, partly by the way of Balbec, and 
partly along the coast of Tripoli and Beyrout towards Acre. 


162. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewed February 28.) 


My Lord, Therapia, February 1, 1841. 

UPON the arrival of the news of the surrender of the Ottoman fleet, I 
wrote to Baron Stiirmer to recommend proceeding to the settlement of the 
conditions to be attached to the grant of the hereditary Government of Egypt to 
Mehemet Ali. His Excellency shortly after sent me a Paper he has drawn up; 
and the next day but one, I had the honour of a visit from him, when I 
proposed a plan which met with his approbation, and which was afterwards set 
forth in my letter to him of the 28th instant. 

I also wrote to M. Titow a letter, (I inclose copy of it,) and I afterwards 
sent to him, and to Count Koenigsmarck, a copy of my letter to Baron de Sttirmer, 
dated 28th January. I received another letter from M. Titow in approbation 
of the plan, which I also inclose with my answer: but a few hours after the 
receipt of this last letter, I had one from Baron de Sturmer, stating that he had 
objections to my plan, and that our Colleagues had the same: to this [ an- 
swered, that I withdrew my plan, as it was no longer approved of; and I stated 
my obligation to follow literally your Lordship’s instructions as contained in your 
despatch of December 17, the last Thad received from you. I inclose my letter 
dated yesterday. Iwill do all I can, in obedience to your Lordship’s instructions, 
to obtain security for the Sultan against the evil designs that Mehemet Ali may 
entertain, and to preserve the people of Egypt in future from the oppression which 
they have hitherto endured ; I am convinced that there is no way of doing both, 
so certain as that which your Lordship says you wish would be taken, Viz. ¢ 
taking the collection of the Revenue out of the hands of the Pasha. If the col- 
lection of the Revenue be left in Mehemet Ali’s hands, your Lordship will see, 


208 


from the inclosed Budget of Egypt, what a vast sum of money will be left at 
his command, and every body knows that money is the most formidable arm he 
can have against the Sultan, and that he will use it. If Baron Stiirmer’s plans be 
adopted, and if the revenues and so forth be left in the hands of Mehemet Ali, I 
am afraid there will be good cause to lament that arrangement ; but if the money 
be not left in Mehemet Ali’s power, I think the Sultan might give him almost 
any privileges. Your Lordship says positively, that all the Laws of the Turkish 
Empire are to apply to Egypt just as to any other province in the Sultan’s 
dominions. Now the law is, that Pashas shall not collect the revenues of their 
Pashalics, but if it be ordered that Mehemet Ali shall pay a tribute for his Pashalic, 
that law must be violated, for he must then receive the revenues. The dangers and 
inconveniences of his receiving the revenues are infinite. He will be the sole 
arbiter of rewards and punishments in Egypt, and the world knows by expe- 
rience how he will treat the people. In my letter of January 31 to Baron 
Stiirmer, I have stated briefly an argument to show that the Convention of 
July 15 is not binding upon the Allies, so as to oblige them to deliver up to 
Mehemet Ali the property and liberty of the Egyptians; and | have shown, that 
if the Convention be construed to bind the Allies in that way, the other enact- 
ments of it are rendered null, and there will be a manifest contradiction of one 
provision of the Treaty with another provision. The Austrians desire to put 
a sudden end (as they suppose they can do) to the question here, by yielding 
every thing to the Pasha. Your Lordship desires to establish future security 
both for the Sultan and his Egyptian subjects. My duty is to follow your 
orders, but could I be shaken in that duty by the exertions of the Austrians, I 
should be still deterred from acting with them for such a purpose, by my own 
knowledge that all this question is to be most rigidly scrutinized in Parliament, 
and that severe censure would fall upon me, if I deviated from your instructions, 
and thereby contributed to sacrifice the Egyptians, and leave the Sultan exposed 
to danger. I have an additional reason derived from information I have 
received, that a pamphlet is prepared for publication (if it be not already pub- 
lished) and addressed to an Anti Slave Trade Association, in which the extent 
of the Slave Trade so long carried on by Mehemet Ali is proved, and the horrors 
of the Chase, as it is called, are fully described. This Chase is commanded by 
one Vissier, a Frenchman employed by Mehemet Ali, and it has for several years 
produced an annual average importation of 16,000 Negroes into Lower Egypt; and 
it is proved, that the number of human beings annually destroyed by the 
hunters of Negroes in their Chase, equals at least the numbers sent into Lower 
Egypt, making a total of more than 30,000 Negroes sacrificed or sent into slavery. 
Leaving the collection and the command of the revenues of Egypt in 
Mehemet Ali’s hands, will enable him to continue this Chase, as it will be a 
reward for having carried it on heretofore ; I could not venture to be personally 
responsible for such things, and if they are done, it should be by the order of 
Her Majesty’s Government. 
The pamphlet I mention has not yet, I believe, been made public, nor sent 
to its destination. It is founded on the best and surest information. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 162. 


Sur les Conditions a attacher a la Concession du Gouvernement Heéréditaire de 
P Egypte que le Sultan a déclaré vouloir accorder & Méhémet Ali. 


_ LE moment étant venu ot la Sublime Porte devra faire connaitre 2 
Méhémet Ali les conditions auxquelles il plaira au Sultan de lui accorder le 
Pachalic héréditaire de Egypte, nos instructions nous prescrivent de lui offrir 
quelques conseils dictés par la constante sollicitude de nos Gouvernemens pour 
les intéréts de Sa Majesté Impériale. Ces conseils seront ainsi le complément 
des secours et de l’appui qu’ils ont prétés 4 ce Monarque dans Ventreprise si 
mémorable qui, grace 4 la Divine Providence, vient d’étre conduite 4 terme 
d’une maniére si avantageuse et si glorieuse pour lui. 
eh ser ate pectie er oe Ee les plus importans a régler avec 
quelques développemens qui serviront a faire connaitre 


209 


a la Sublime Porte notre pensée a cet égard. Dans cette circonstance encore le 
Traité du 15 Juillet, dont les effets nous ont été si salutaires, nous servira de 
base. Les stipulations renfermées dans l’Acte Séparé de ce Traité, et qu'il s’agit 
d’exécuter aujourd’hui, sont celles qui suivent :— ; 


ARTICLE III. 


‘Le ‘Tribut Annuel 4 payer au Sultan par Méhémet Ali sera proportionné 
au plus ou moins de territoire dont ce dernier obtiendra l’administration.” 


Ce territoire se borne aujourd’hui a la seule Egypte, pour laquelle il a été 
fixé en 1811 qu’il payerait 12,000 bourses, qui, au cours actuel de la monnaie 
Turque, correspondent 4 une somme plus que quadruple, c’est-A-dire 4 50,000 
bourses. Mais comme il est de notoriété publique que les revenues de cette 
seule province ont été portées depuis 4 400,000 bourses sans que le pays en ait 
souffert*, et que les frais d’administration aujourd’hui, ot le Pacha n’a plus 
besoin de flotte et d’armée, puisque son avenir est assuré, peuvent étre couvert 
avec le quart de cette somme, le tribut 4 payer désormais devra nécessairement 
étre porté 4 un chiffre bien autrement considérable, qu’il plaira & Sa Hautesse 
de fixer. 

Les renseignemens renfermés dans le travail ci-joint sur les finances de 
Egypte pourraient guider 4 cet égard les Ministres Ottomans. Nous devons 
a cette occasion appeler leur attention sur les arrérages dis par Méhémet Ali 
pour les années 1839 et 1840, et qu’on pourra lui demander en toute justice. 
Un autre point encore plus important pour la Sublime Porte est, qu’elle cherche 
a se mettre a Vabri de la détérioration de la monnaie et de la variation du cours 
de change. Elle pourrait a cet effet, lorsque la somme de tribut sera fixée, en 
déterminer la valeur en piastres d’Egypte, d’aprés leur taux et poids actuel, 
jusqu’au moment out les améliorations que la Porte se propose d’introduire dans 
son systéme monétaire puissent recevoir leur exécution, et ou par conséquent les 
plastres d’Egypte pourront étre remplacées sans préjudice pour le trésor Impérial 
par des piastres Turques. 

Il s’entend que si Méhémet Ali voulait porter en compte ou déduire du 
tribut & payer les dépenses qu’il a faites pour l’entretien de la flotte Ottomane 
pendant tout le tems qu’il a restée dans les ports de |’Egypte, une pareille pré- 
tention sera déclarée inadmissible d’aprés la teneur de |’Article IV. de lActe 
Séparé, qui a prévu Ce cas. 


ARTICLE V. 


| “Tous les Traités et toutes les lois de l’Empire Ottoman s’appliqueront 
-aVEgypte comme a toute autre partie de cet Empire. Mais le Sultan consent, 
qu’a condition du paiement régulier du tribut susmentionné, Méhémet Ali et 
ses descendans pergoivent, au nom du Sultan, et comme délégués de Sa Majesté 
Impériale, dans Jes provinces dont l’administration leur sera confiée, les taxes et 
impots légalement établis. Il est entendu, en outre, que moyennant la perception 
des taxes et impdts susdits, Méhémet Ali et ses descendans pourvoiront a toutes 
es dépenses de l’administration civile et militaire des dites provinces.” 

Cet Article n’a pas besoin de commentaire. L’Egypte faisant partie de 
Empire Ottoman, les Traités de la Sublime Porte avec les Puissances Etran- 
géres devront y étre exécutés avec la méme rigueur que dans toutes ses autres 
provinces. Il en sera de méme de toutes les lois de Empire parmi lesquelles 
le Hatt de Gulhané occupe aujourd’hui la premiére place. Ce Hatt, monument 
impérissable de gloire pour le regne du Sultan Abdul Medjid, et qui a hé la 
Turquie aux peuples les plus civilisés de la terre par des liens désormais indisso- 
lubles, ne pourra manquer d’exercer sur l’Egypte la plus salutaire influence. 
Il garantira le peuple de l’oppression tyrannique sous laquelle il a gemi jusqu’icl, 
il régularisera la perception des taxes et des impdots, il mettra un terme aux 
‘ abus révoltans de la Conscription et aux expropriations injustes et arbitraires, et 
lui assurera graduellement tous les bienfaits d’une civilisation éclairée. 


* Mélémet Ali, d’aprés son propre aveu, les a fait monter bien au-dela de cette somme pen- 
dant ces derniéres années. 
2 E 


Le droit de battre monnaie ayant toujours été établi en Egypte, Méhémet 
Ali et ses successeurs continueront 4 en jouir; mais elle devra étre au meme coin 
que celle que V’on frappe 4 Constantinople. Quant au systtme monétaire, i 
devrait ¢tre le méme pour l’Egypte comme pour les autres parties de Empire, 
mais cela ne pourra se faire que lorsque la Porte sera parvenu a améliorer sa 
propre monnaie, qui malheureusement ne vaut pas celle de l’Egypte. Vouloir 
unir les deux systémes dés a présent, ce serait détruire gratuitement ce que 
Méhémet Ali a fait de bon et d’utile, et. ce qu’il est dans l’intérét de la Sublime 
Porte de maintenir et d’établir successivement dans tous ses Etats. 

Parmi les Traités avec les Puissances Etrangéres mentionnés plus haut, il 
en est une surtout qui, s'il est maintenu dans toute sa rigueur, pourra ouvrir 
une ére de prospérité aux habitans d’Egypte, c’est le Traité de Commerce conclu 
d’abord avec l’Angleterre, et auquel la plupart des Puissances Européennes ont 
adhéré depuis. Ce Traité, en abolissant les monopoles, donnera un libre essor a 
Vindustrie, fera cesser une foule d’exactions arbitraires et accablantes pour le 
peuple, qu’il tirera ainsi de I’état d’abjection et de misére dans lequel il gémit, et 
assurera le bien-étre du pays, en rendant 4 l’agriculture des portions de terre trés- 
considérables restées incultes jusqu’a ce moment. 


ARTICLE VI. 


. | 

‘‘ Les forces de terre et de mer que pourra entretenir le Pacha d’Egypte, 
faisant partie des forces de Empire Ottoman, seront toujours considérées comme 
entretenues pour le service de |’Etat.” 


Cet Article exige quelques développemens. Les forces Egyptiennes devront 
désormais faire partie de celle du Sultan; il s’entend qu’il appartient 4 Sa Majesté 
Impériale 4 en déterminer la quotité et la répartition, et de les appeler en tems de 
guerre sur tel point de l’Empire ot leur présence pourrait étre jugée nécessaire. 

Les nominations des officiers de terre et de mer ne pourront étre faites en 
Egypte que par le Sultan, comme dans toutes les autres provinces de |’Empire. 
Le Sultan, cependant, par une faveur spéciale, et vu léloignement de l’Egypte, 
pourrait autoriser le Pacha a accorder des avancemens au nom de Sa Majesté 
Impériale jusqu’au grade de Jusbachi inclusivement dans l’armée de terre, et de 
Premier Lieutenant dans la flotte. Tous les officiers employés maintenant en 
Egypte devront, pour pouvoir y rester, obtenir du Sultan la confirmation de 
leurs grades. II faudrait toutefois, ce nous semble, leur faire donner d’avance 
Vassurance que cette confirmation leur sera accordée sans difficulté. Par ce 
moyen toute pensée de réaction ou de vindicte sera écartée. 

Il est entendu que Méhémet Ali ne pourrait désormais faire construire 
aucun batiment de guerre sans lautorisation expresse de Sa Majesté Impériale. 

Le pavillon Egyptien devra étre remplacé 4 Vavenir par le pavillon de Sa 
Majesté Impériale tel qwil est en usage dans toutes les autres parties de ’ Empire. 
fl en est de méme de luniforme Egyptien pour les troupes de terre et de mer, 
qui devra étre remplacé par les costumes usités dans les autres parties de 
’Empire Ottoman; et des modifications exigées, par le climat, telles que, par 
exemple, Pusage d’étoffes plus légéres, pourront seules avoir lieu aprés que Sa 
Majesté Impériale y aura donné son assentiment. 

Lorsque tous ces points seront définitivement réglés par le Sultan et ses 
Ministres, ce qu’il me parait important de faire sans retard, les décisions de Sa 
Majesté Impériale devront étre annoncées 4 Méhémet Ali par le firman qui 
Vinvestira du gouvernement héréditaire de ?Egypte. Il devra y étre dit claire- 
ment, que cette grande et importante concession que le Sultan a daigné faire 
dans sa magnanimité, dépend de l’exécution fidéle des conditions mentionnées 
ci-dessus, et pourra étre révoquée le jour o& Méhémet Ali ou les membres de sa 
famille appelés & lui succéder se refuseront A les remplir. 

Le rang de Pacha d’Egypte devra étre déterminé comme étant celui d’un 
Vizir de Empire, et n’ayant en cette qualité, 4 Vhérédité prés, aucune autre 
prérogative que celles dont jouissent les autres Vizirs. 

Quant au mode de la succession, la pensée de la Sublime Porte nous est 
connue. Elle voudrait se réserver le droit, lorsque la place de Pacha d’Egypte 
sera vacante, de nommer tel individu de la famille de Méhémet Ali quelle jugera 
y &tre le plus propre. En tout cas il faudra que ses intentions 4 cet égard 
soient bien clairement exprimées dans le firman d’investiture. 


211 


Il devra y étre dit aussi, que les Pachas d’Egypte seront tenus  l’avenir, 
tant a l’époque de leur nomination qu’’ occasion de Vavénement d’un Sultan, 
a se rendre de leurs personnes & Constantinople pour y préter le serment exigé, 
et y recevoir l’investiture, et qu’ils ne pourront en aucun cas prendre le titre de 
Gouverneur de la province placée sous leur administration avant d’avoir rempli 
cette formalité. 

La Sublime Porte parait désirer que ni Méhémet Ali ni son fils Ibrahim 
viennent ici a ’occasion de l’investiture, leur apparition pouvant faire naitre une 
foule (intrigues qu’il est bon de prévenir; mais si Méhémet Ali voulait y envoyer 
son fils Said Bey, un pareil acte de soumission serait peut-étre agréable au 
Sultan, et ferait un bon effet dans le public. 


(Translation.) 


Upon the conditions to be attached to the concession of the Hereditary Government 
of Egypt, which the Sultan has declared his willingness to grant to Mehemet 
Ali. | 


THE moment being arrived when the Sublime Porte will have to make 
known to Mehemet Ali the conditions on which the Sultan will be pleased 
to grant to him the hereditary Pashalic of Egypt, our instructions enjoin us 
to offer to it some advice dictated by the constant solicitude of our Govern- 
ments for the interests of His Imperial Majesty. ‘This advice will thus be the 
completion of the succour and the support which they have afforded to this 
monarch in the very memorable undertaking which, thanks to Divine Provi- 
dence, has just been brought to an end in a manner so advantageous and so 
glorious for him. 

I am about to enumerate in this place the most important points to be 
settled with Mehemet Ali, and to add thereto some explanations which 
will serve to make known to the Sublime Porte our thoughts in this respect. 
In the present instance also, the Treaty of the 15th of July, the effects of 
which have been so beneficial to us, will serve for our ground-work. The 
stipulations contained in the Separate Act of that Treaty, and which are to be 
now carried into effect, are the following: 


ARTICLE III. 


‘“« The annual tribute to be paid to the Sultan by Mehemet Ali shall be 
proportioned to the greater or less amount of territory of which the latter may 
obtain the administration.” 

This territory is limited at present to Egypt alone, for which it was fixed 
in 1811, that he should pay 12,000 purses, which, at the present course of 
Turkish money, is equivalent to a sum more than quadruple, that is, to 50,000 
purses. But as itis matter of public notoriety, that the revenues of this 
province alone have since been carried up to 400,000 purses, without the. 
country having suffered from it*, and that the expenses of administration at 
the present time, when the Pasha has no longer occasion for a fleet and an 
army, since his future position is secured, can be covered by a fourth part of 
that sum, the tribute to be hereafter paid will necessarily have to be aug- 
mented to a much greater amount, which it shall please His Highness to fix. 

The particulars contained in the annexed paper on the finances of Egypt — 
might be a guide to the Ottoman Ministers in this respect. We must on this 
occasion draw their attention to the arrears due by Mehemet Ali for the years 
1839 and 1840, and which may, with perfect justice, be demanded of him. 
Another point still more important for the Sublime Porte is, that it should 
endeavour to secure itself against the depreciation of the coin, and the varia- 
tion in the course of exchange. For this purpose it might, when the amount 
of tribute shall be fixed, determine the value thereof in Egyptian piastres, 
according to their present rate and weight, up to the time when the improve- 


* Mehemet Ali, according to his own admission, has caused them to amount to a much greater 
sum during these last years. 
2K 2 


LL gtr natin ne ft ee 
s) ° 


212 

ments which the Porte purposes to introduce into its monetary system, can 
be carried into effect, and when, consequently, the Egyptian piastres will be 
able to be replaced, without detriment to the Imperial Treasury, by Turkish 
lastres. . 

It is understood that if Mehemet Ali should desire to take credit for, or 
to deduct from the tribute to be paid by him, the expenses which he has 
incurred for the maintenance of the Ottoman fleet during the whole time 
which it has remained in the Egyptian ports, such a pretension shall be 
declared inadmissible according to the tenour of the Fourth Article of the 
Separate Act, which has provided for this contingency. 


ARTICLE V. 


‘«« All the Treaties, and all the Laws of the Ottoman Empire shall be 
applicable to Egypt, in the same manner as to every other part of that 
Empire. But the Sultan consents, that on condition of the regular pay- 
ment of the tribute above-mentioned, Mehemet Ali and his descendants 
shall collect, in the name of the Sultan, and as delegates of his Highness, 
within the provinces, the administration of which shall be confided to them, 
the taxes and imposts legally established. It is moreover understood, that in 
consideration of the receipt of the aforesaid taxes and imposts, Mehemet Ali 
and his descendants shall defray all the expenses of the civil and military 
administration of the said provinces.” 


This Article does not require any comment. As Egypt forms part of the 
Ottoman Empire, the Treaties of the Sublime Porte with Foreign Powers must 
be executed there with the same strictness as in all its other provinces. ‘The 
same will be the case with respect to all the laws of the empire, among which 
the Hatti Sheriff of Gulhané now holds the first place. This Hatti Sheriff, 
the imperishable monument of glory for the reign of the Sultan Abdul Medjid, 
and which has united Turkey with the most civilized people of the earth by 
bonds not hereafter to be dissolved, cannot fail to exercise the most salutary 
influence upon Egypt. It will secure the people from the tyrannical oppres- 
sion under which it has hitherto groaned; it will regulate the receipt of the 
taxes and imposts; it will put an end to the revolting abuses of the conscrip- 
tion, and to the unjust and arbitrary seizures of property, and will ensure to 
it by degrees all the benefits of an enlightened civilization. 

The right of coining money having always been established in Egypt, 
Mehemet Ali and his successors will continue to enjoy it, but it must be of 
the same die as that coined at Constantinople. As regards the monetary 
system, that must be the same for Egypt as for the other parts of the empire, 
but this cannot be effected until the Porte shall have succeeded in improving 
its own coin, which unhappily is not of the same value as that of Egypt. An 
attempt to blend the two systems from the present moment, would be gra- 
tuitously to destroy what Mehemet Ali has done of good and useful, and 
which it is the interest of the Sublime Porte to maintain and successively to 
establish in all its dominions. 

Among the Treaties with Foreign Powers mentioned above, there is one 
especially, which, if it is maintained in all its strictness, will be capable of 
opening an era of prosperity to the inhabitants of Egypt, namely, the Treaty 
of Commerce first concluded with England, and to which the greater part of 
the European Powers have subsequently acceded. This Treaty, by abolishing 
monopolies, will give a free course to industry, will put an end to a multitude 
of arbitrary exactions oppressive to the people, which it will thus extricate from 
the abject and miserable condition under which they now groan, and will ensure 
the prosperity of the country, by restoring to agriculture very considerable 
portions of land which have remained uncultivated up to the present time. 


ARTICLE VI. 


“The military and naval forces which may be maintained by the Pasha of 
Egypt, forming part of the forces of the Ottoman Empire, shall always be 
considered as maintained for the service of the State.” 

This Article requires some explanation. As the Egyptian forces are 
hereafter to form part of those of the Sultan, it is understood that it belongs 


213 


to His Imperial Majesty to determine the number and distribution of them, 
and to summon them in time of war to that point of the Empire at which 
their presence may be deemed necessary. 

The appointment of military and naval officers can only be made in 
Egypt by the Sultan, as in all the other provinces of the Empire. Never- 
theless, the Sultan, by special favour, and in consideration of the remoteness 
of Egypt, might authorize the Pasha to grant promotions in the name of His 
Imperial Majesty up to the rank of Yous-bashi inclusively in the land forces, 
and of first lieutenant in the fleet. All the officers at present employed in 
Egypt, must, in order to be able to remain there, obtain from the Sultan the 
confirmation of their ranks. Still it would, as it appears, be requisite to give 
them beforehand the assurance that such confirmation will be granted to 
them without difficulty. By this means all notions of reaction or revenge 
will be put aside. j 

It is understood that Mehemet Ali cannot hereafter cause any vessel of 
war to be built without the express permission of His Imperial Majesty. 

The Egyptian flag must henceforth be replaced by the flag of His 
Imperial Majesty, such as is used in all the other parts of the Empire. The 
same is the case with the Egyptian uniform for the land and sea forces, 
which must be replaced by the dress worn in the other parts of the Ottoman 
Empire ; and the modifications rendered necessary by the climate, such, for 
instance, as the employment of lighter stuffs, can alone be adopted after His 
Imperial Majesty shall have assented to them. 

When all these points shall have been definitively settled by the Sultan 
and his Ministers, which it appears to me important to do without delay, 
His Imperial Majesty’s determinations will have to be announced to Mehemet 
Ali by the firman which shall invest him with the hereditary government of 
Egypt. It should be clearly expressed therein, that this great and important 
concession which the Sultan in his magnanimity has been pleased to make, 
depends on the faithful execution of the conditions above-mentioned, and will 
be subject to revocation the day that Mehemet Ali or the members of his 
family called upon to succeed him, shall refuse to fulfil them. 

The rank of Pasha of Egypt should be fixed as that of a Vizier of the 
Empire, and not having in this character, with the exception of hereditary 
right, any other prerogative than those enjoyed by the other Viziers. 

As regards the mode of succession, we are acquainted with the notion 
of the Sublime Porte. It would wish to reserve to itself the right, when the 
place of Pasha of Egypt shall be vacant, to name such person of the family 
of Mehemet Ali as it shall consider best qualified for it. In any case, it will 
be requisite that its intentions in this respect shall be very clearly expressed 
in the firman of investiture. 

_ It should also be stated therein, that the Pashas of Egypt are bound 
henceforth, at well as the time of their nomination, as on the occasion of the 
accession of a Sultan, to proceed in person to Constantinople, there to take 
the required oath, and receive the investiture, and that they can in no case 
assume the title of Governor of the province placed under their administration 
before fulfilling that formality. 

The Sublime Porte appears to be desirous that neither Mehemet Ali 
nor his son Ibrahim should come here on the occasion of the investiture, as 
their appearance might give rise to a multitude of intrigues which it is well 
to prevent; but if Mehemet Ali should be willing to send hither his son Said 
Bey, such an act of submission would perhaps be agreeable to the Sultan, 
and would produce a good effect on the public. 


Sub-Inclosure 1 in No. 162. 
Du Tribut que paie l Egypte. 


MEHEMET ALI fut installé dans le Pachalic d’Egypte en 1806, a condi- 
tion qu’il enverrait au Sultan un présent de quatre mille bourses, qui, d’aprés le 
cours d’alors, représentaient 4-peu-prés la somme de deux millions quatre cent 
mille florins. 

Le Pachalic d’Egypte d’alors était communement appelé le Pachalic du 


—_ > a el vee Oe ee eee eT ery Pe ae ee =— SP 


214 


Caire (Belled el Mase), il ne s’étendait qu’a l’Egypte Moyenne et au Delta. Le 
Said (Haute Egypte) était divisé en plusieurs Baililus, et administré par les Beys 
Mamelouks, et Alexandrie avec une partie de la province Béhéré par un Pacha 
indépendant de celui du Caire. 

Peu apres l’installation de Méhémet Ali dans le Pachalic d’Egypte, la Porte 
consentit A lui donner l’administration du Pachalic d’Alexandrie en récompense 
des services qu’il avait rendus 4! Empire en 1807, a Voccasion de |’évacuation 
de la Basse Egypte et de la ville d’Alexandrie par les Anglais. 

Les revenus de ces deux Pachalics se composaient : 

1°. Du Miri sur les terres cultivées alors par les fellahs non dépendant des 
Beys; 

i 2°. Des droits d’importation et d’exportation de douanes de Suez, du Caire, 
de Damiette, de Rosette, et d’Alexandrie ; 

3°, Du droit sur les Caravanes du Sennar, Darfour et Cordoufan ; 

4°. Du Karatsch, payé par les Rayas. 

Il n’y a point de données tant soit peu dignes de foi ni sur le montant de 
ces revenus, ni sur celui des dépenses. Méhémet Ali assure cependant que son 
Hasné ne réalisait jamais au-dela de 35,000 bourses par an, et que les frais pour 
Vadministration civile et pour les troupes lui laissaient 4 peme autant qu'il fallait 
pour vivre et pour contenter ceux de Constantinople. 

Pour améliorer l’état de ses finances, il avait voulu augmenter le miri, mais 
ayant trouvé une opposition trés-décidée dans le corps des Oulemas, et des 
Propriétaires, qui ne cessaient de lui rappeler le Firman du Sultan Sélim, par 
lequel les impéts en Egypte avaient été mvariablement fixés, Méhémet Ali 
abandonna cette idée et se résigna d’autant plus que la présence des Mamelouks 
lui paraissait dangereuse pour une innovation qui d’ailleurs n’était nullement 
populaire. 

Cependant, aprés la défaite des Mamelouks en 1811, Méhémet Ali s’empara 
du Said. Il en sollicitait investiture, offrant une augmentation considérable du 
tribut. 

Cette investiture lui fut accordée, 4 condition qu'il paierait un tribut de 
douze mille bourses par an, qui, d’aprés le cours d’alors, équivalaient 4 deux 
millions quatre cent mille florms. Débarrassé des Mamelouks, Méhémet Ali, 
d’accord avec les Oulemas, et faisant valoir la dépréciation des piastres, augmenta 
considérablement le miri et les droits des douanes pour le commerce de l’intérieur : 
ses revenus avaient triples. 

I] était, en outre, devenu propriétaire de la majeure partie des biens fonds 
abandonnés par les Mamelouks du Said, et obtint la dévolution de toutes les 
propriétés dont les titres d’acquisition (Hodgets) n’étaient pas rédigés d’aprés 
ee reglement établi par lui peu de semaines avant sa loi d’expropriation 
orcée. 

Méhémet Ali était déja 4 méme de défrayer un état des dépenses de 
125,000 bourses, et les recettes présentaient un excédant considérable. 

_ La Porte ayant eu connaissance positive de l'état favorable des finances 
d’Egypte, témoigna le désir d’en partager les revenus. En conséquence de cela, 
Satif Pacha fut chargé de demander une augmentation du tribut, mais Méhémet 
Ali, sous prétexte que la guerre d’Arabie lui causait de grands frais, s’y refusa 
nettement. Satif Pacha, instigateur de la susdite demande d’augmentation du 
tribut, fut ensuite, sous prétexte d’avoir voulu provoquer une révolte et dépos- 
séder Méhémet Ali, publiquement décapité au Caire. 

; Une semblable demande fut faite en dernier lieu en 1824, mais alors 
pai la guerre de la Morée qui mit Méhémet Ali dans ’impossibilité d’y faire 

roit. 


Cependant, les revenus de Méhémet Ali augmentaient idé 
Elles étaient en 1824 de 240,000 bourses. 3 ore ale 


Mais comme ses armemens de terre et de mer augmentaient toujours, cet 
état de recettes ne couvrait pas celui des dépenses. 


I] avait donc imaginé une quantité de monopoles et d’ 
appaltes, qu’ xo 
ploiter avec toute la sévérité fiscale. : PP quil fit ex 


a en 
ry ee ecu de la Hejré) le Grand Seigneur lui a confié administration 


Le tribut n’a pas été fixé, parce ‘j a-fait dévasté 
aN , ( f que Vile, tout-a-fait dévastée par la euerre 
civile, présentait un déficit. Moustapha Pacha prélevait sur les revel A titre de 
ses appointemens, 2,500,000 piastres par an. 


Ainsi, malgré cette nouvelle acquisition, malgré la forte dépréciation des 


215 


piastres, et malgré l’énorme accroissement des revenus de |’Egypte, le tribut de 
12,000 bourses est resté intact. 


Les Recettes en 1830 étaient de 493,791 bourses 
Les Dépenses- —- - - 444,872 


Excédant de Recettes 48,919 


En 1833 un Budget fut officiellement dressé et publié, et établit les Recettes 
et les Dépenses comme suit : 
Recettes “. : “ - “S505;1385 bourses 
Dépenses_ - - - - 415,513 


Excédant de Recettes - 89,622 


Nous ne pouvons pas dire si ce Budget d’Egypte est réel ou hypothétique— 
nous nous bornons a en donner une traduction exacte ci-aprés. 

Le fait est que la guerre de Syrie avait cofitée au-dela de 300,000 bourses, et 
que le Hasné, d’aprés les aveux du-Hasnadar & la fin de V’exercice 1248 (1833), 
bien loin de présenter un excédant de Recettes comme l’établit le Budget, se trou- 
vait au-dessous de 165,000 bourses; Méhémet Ali ne voulait plus de Budget, il 
suspendit le paiement du solde des troupes et des fonctionnaires civils, et se 
déclara méme hors d’état de payer le tribut. 

D’aprés l’arrangement du 14 Mai, 1833, Méhémet Ali consentit 4 payer pour 
VPEgypte le méme tribut qu’il payait jusqu’alors.,; et pour les Pachalics de la Syrie,, 
d’ Adana, et de la Créte, ce qu’avaient payé ses prédécesseurs, ce qui fut établi 
ainsi qu’il suit: 


Egypte = = = - 12,000 bourses 
Candie : - a =1* 2000 
Syrie et Adana = = 18,000 

En tout - & 32,000 


Ce qui équivaut 4 un million six cent mille florins: c’est-a-dire, Méhémet Ali 
paie huit cent mille florins de moins qu'il payait pour le seul Pachalic d’Kgypte 
sans le Said, sans Alexandrie, sans la faculté d’augmenter le miri et établir des 
monopoles, qu’ila su exploiter avec autant d’adresse que de cruauté, au point que, 
d’aprés son aveu, ces différens chefs d’impots directs et indirects, y compris 
la Syrie et la Candie, lui ont fourni en 1838 neuf cent mille bourses. 

Nous ne connaissons pas exactement les détails de cet immense revenu, 
ni des dépenses qui en dépendent, mais nous savons que malgré les assurances de 
Meéhémet Ali, que cette année lui donnait un excédant de recettes de 197,000 
bourses, il n’a pu ni payer l’armée, ni défrayer les différens services qui en dé- 
pendent, ni payer la flotte ni les employés de Vadministration du pays. L’Armée 
réclame de 16 818 mois, l’Escadre 11 mois, les Employés 13 mois de solde; le 
tribut est di pour 1839 et 1840. On peut évaluer ces différens arriérés a cing 
cent mille bourses, ce qui correspond exactement a vingt cing millions de florins 
de Convention. 

Nous pensons que Méhémet Ali, voulant réduire les impéts aun taux com- 
patible avec le Hatti-Chérif de Gulhané et avec le Traité de Commerce, pourra 
compter sur un revenu de 400,000 bourses par an ; de lautre cote, débarrassé du 
surplus de l’armée de terre et de mer, des ruimeuses commissions données a |’é- 
tranger, des constructions navales, et des dépenses secretes, il pourra réduire les 
frais 4 100,000 bourses. Ce qui lui donnera l’énorme excédant, d’a-peu- 
pres 300,000 bourses, ou 15,000,000 de florins. Rios 1 

Nous pensons que notre calcul est une raisonnable approximative, car le miri, 
qui ne pése actuellement que sur 3,856,226 feddans, produit 225,000 bourses. 
Or, il y a 3,157,000 feddans de terrains incultes, dont deux tiers pourraient étre 
défriché sans la conscription et sans les travaux forcés, qui, outre la consomma- 
tion réelle en hommes, causent une émigration qui enléve encore plus d’individus 
a Vagriculture que Varmée; cela produirait 120 a 130,000 bourses. 

Ajoutons a cela le produit des douanes d’importation (de manufactures, vins, 
&c., d’Europe et d’Asie) et d’exportation d’objets non monopolisés, comme 
manufactures Egyptiennes, indigo, sucre, gommes et autres drogues, tel qu'il est 
actuellement fixé par les contrats de ferme avec 20,000 bourses ; et les douanes 
pour les céréales, qui formaient lobjet des monopoles, tel que bles, orges, riz, 
féves, lentilles, dourah, et autres, dont l’exportation s’éleve, année commune, de 


6 A 700,000 ardebs, et qui, d’aprés le nouveau Traité de Commerce, pourront étre 
exportés en payant 9 pour cent, ce qui produira _ 18,000 bourses. 
Coton - 4 = < - . 10,000 
Lin et grainde lin” - - - 1,200 
Droit de transit du café, ivoire, 
plumes d’Autruche, poudre d’or, 
et autres objets de commerce 


d’Afrique et d’Arabie - - 6,000 


Ainsi Méhémet Ali pourra abolir tous les autres droits, taxes, et impéts, 
délivrer les paysans et les industriels des plus cruelles exigeances et vexations 
fiscales, et simplifier la perception du miri et des douanes, et en supprimant les 
innombrables monopoles donner ason administration une marche égale, ferme, et 
humaine. Pay 

Le chiffre de revenus ci-dessus n’est nullement exagéré. Méhémet Ali lui- 
méme assurait que le miri et les douanes de l’Egypte seule, cultivée ainsi qu'il se 
proposait de le faire aussitét qu’il pourra mettre fin a ses démonstrations belli- 
queuses, pourraient lui donner dix millions de florins par an, frais d’administra- 
tions, entretien, &c. payé. ; y 

S’agissant de fixer le montant du tribut que Méhémet Ali aura désormais 
4 payer pour l’Egypte, il est de toute convenance d’avoir égard aux données que 
nous venons d’énoncer. 


(Translation.) 
On the Tribute paid by Egypt. 


MEHEMET ALI was installed in the Pashalic of Egypt in 1806, on 
condition that he should send to the Sultan a present of 4000 purses, which, 
according to the course of exchange at that time, represented about the sum of 
2,400,000 florins. 

The Pashalic of Egypt at that time was commonly called the Pashalic of 
Cairo (Belled el Mase); it extended only to Middle Egypt and to the Delta. 
The Said (Upper Egypt) was divided into several districts, and administered by 
the Mameluke Beys, and Alexandria with a part of the Province Behéré by 
a Pasha, independent of the Pasha of Cairo. 

A short time after the installation of Mehemet Ali in the Pashalic of Egypt, 
the Porte consented to give him the administration of the Pashalic of Alexandria 
as a reward for the services which he had rendered to the Empire in 1807, on 
the occasion of the evacuation of Lower Egypt and of the City of Alexandria by 
the English. 

The revenues of these two Pashalics were composed :— 

1. Of the Land Tax upon the lands at that time cultivated by the Fellahs, 
not dependent on the Beys. 

2. Of the Customs-duties of import and export at Suez, Cairo, Damietta, 
Rosetta, and Alexandria. 

3. Of the duty on the Caravaans of Sennaar, Darfour, and Cordufan. 

4. Of the Capitation Tax, paid by the Rayahs. 

There are no data at all worthy of credit, either as to the amount of these 
revenues, or as to that of the expences. Mehemet Ali, however, asserts that his 
treasury never realized above 35,000 purses a year, and that the expences of the 
civil administration and of the troops left him scarcely sufficient to maintain 
himself and to satisfy the people of Constantinople. 

In order to improve the state of his finances, he had wished to increase the 
land tax, but having encountered very decided opposition in the body of the 
Ulemas and of the proprietors, who did not cease to remind him of the firman 
of Sultan Selim, by which the taxes in Egypt had been invariably fixed, 
Mehemet Ali gave up that notion, and was the more resigned in doing so, as the 
presence of the Mamelukes appeared to him to be dangerous with reference to 
an innovation, which was besides by no means popular. 

Nevertheless, after the defeat of the Mamelukes in 1811, Mehemet Ali 
made himself master of the Said. He solicited the investiture of it, offering a 
considerable increase of tribute. | 


217 


That investiture was granted to him, on condition that he should pay 
12,000 purses a year, which, according to the course of exchange at that time, 
was equivalent to 2,400,000 florins. Being relieved from’ the Mamelukes, 
Mehemet Ali, with the concurrence of the Ulemas, and alleging the depreciation 
of the piastres, increased considerably the land tax and the duties of customs on 
the internal trade: his revenues were tripled. 

He had besides become proprietor of the greater part of the real property 
abandoned by the Mamelukes of the Said, and he acquired the reversion of all the 
properties of which the title-deeds were not drawn up according to a regulation 
established by him a few weeks before his law of compulsory surrender. 

Mehemet Ali was already in a state to defray an expenditure of 125,000 
purses, and the receipts showed a considerable excess. 

The Porte having positive knowledge of the favourable state of the finances 
of Egypt, manifested a wish to share its revenues. In consequence of that, 
Satif Pasha was directed to demand an increase of tribute, but Mehemet Ali, 
under pretence that the war in Arabia occasioned him great expence, flatly 
refused it. Satif Pasha, who had instigated the above-mentioned demand for 
an increase, was afterwards, on the pretence that he had wished to excite a 
revolt, and dispossess Mehemet Ali, publicly beheaded in Cairo. 

A similar demand was made in the last instance in 1824, but then it was 
the war of the Morea which rendered Mehemet Ali unable to comply with it. 

Meanwhile, the revenues of Mehemet Ali increased considerably. In 1824, 
they amounted to 24,000 purses. 

But as his armaments by land and sea were continually increased, this state 
of receipts did not cover that of expenditure. 

He then devised a number of monopolies and appaltos, which he carried 
through with every fiscal severity. 

In 1830 (1245 of the Hegira), the Grand Seignor conferred upon him the 
administration of the Island of Candia. 

The tribute was not settled, because the island, being altogether laid waste 
by civil war, presented a deficit. Mustapha Pasha deducted from its revenues, 
as his allowances, 2,500,000 piastres a year. 

Thus, notwithstanding this new acquisition, notwithstanding the great 
depreciation of the piastres, and notwithstanding the enormous increase of the 
revenues of Egypt, the tribute of 12,000 purses remained untouched. 


The receipts in 1830, were ~ - 493,791 purses 
The expenditure - - - 444,872 
Excess of receipts - - 48,919 


In 1833, a budget was officially drawn up and published, and exhibited the 
receipts and the expenditure as follows : ; 


Receipts - “ = - 505,135 purses 
Expenditure = - - - 415,513 
Excess of receipts - 89,622 


We are unable to say whether this budget of Egypt is real or imaginary ; 
we confine ourselves to giving an exact translation of it. 

The fact is that the war of Syria had cost above 300,000 purses, and that 
the treasury, according to the admissions of the Treasurer at the end of the 
period 1248 (1833), far from presenting an excess of receipts as exhibited by the 
budget, was 165,000 purses deficient ; Mehemet Ali would have nothing further 
to do with a budget; he suspended the issue of pay to the troops and civil 
officers, and declared himself even incapable of paying the tribute. _ 

According to the arrangement of May 14, 1833, Mehemet Ali consented to 
pay for Egypt the same tribute which he paid up to that time, and for the Pasha- 
lics of Syria, Adana, and Crete, what his predecessors had paid, which was settled 
as follows :— 


Ded 


f (oval a ri Sn Di 7 oat 


218 


Egypt ‘ ; . 12,000 purses. 
Candia 2) heen, oo BROT Ss 
Syria and Adana x PE OCD ir 55 


42,000 — ,, 


Which is equivalent to 1,600,000 florins: that is to say, Mehemet Ali pays 
800,000 florins less than he paid for the Pashalic of Egypt alone, without the 
Said, without Alexandria, without the power of increasing the land tax and 
establishing monopolies, which he has known how to turn to account with as 
much address as cruelty, to such an extent as that, by his own admission, these 
different heads of direct and indirect taxes, including therein Syria and Candia, 
furnished him in 1838 with 900,000 purses. 

We are not exactly aware of the details of this immense revenue, nor of the 
expenses connected with it; but we know that notwithstanding Mehemet Ali’s 
assurances that this year gave him an excess of 197,000 purses, he has not been 
able either to pay the army, or to defray the charges of the different services con- 
nected with it, or to pay the fleet or the civil servants of the country. The 
army claims pay for sixteen or eighteen months, the fleet for eleven, the civil 
servants for thirteen; the tribute is owing for 1839 and 1840. These different 
arrears may be calculated at 500,000 purses, which tallies exactly with 25,000,000 
of Convention florins. 

We conceive that Mehemet Ali, if he chooses to reduce the taxes to a scale 
consistent with the Hatti Sheriff of Gulhané and with the Treaty of Commerce, 
can reckon upon a revenue of 400,000 purses a year; on the other hand, being 
relieved from the surplus of the land and sea forces, from the ruinous 
commissions which he gives in foreign countries, from ship-building, and from 
secret expences, he will be able to reduce his expenditure to 100,000 purses. This 
will give him the enormous excess of nearly 300,000 purses, or 15,000,000 
florins. 

We consider that our calculation is a reasonable estimate ; for the land-tax, 
which at present affects only 3,856,226 feddans, produces 225,000 purses. Now 
there are 3,157,000 feddans of uncultivated lands, two-thirds of which might be 
cleared without the conscription and without forced labour, which, besides the 
real consumption of men, occasion an emigration which deprives agriculture of 
more individuals than even the army: that would produce from 120,000 to 
130,000 purses. 

Add to this the produce of the duties on imports (of manufactures, wines, 
&c., of Europe and of Asia,) and on the export of objects not subject to mono- 
poly, as Egyptian manufactures, indigo, sugar, gums, and other drugs, such as it 
is now fixed by lease at 20,000 purses, and the duties on the grains which were 
monopolized, such as wheat, barley, rice, beans, lentils, dourah, and others, the 
exportation of which in ordinary years amounts from 600,000 to 700,000 ardebs, 
and which, according to the new Treaty, can be exported on paying 9 per cent., 


which will produce . : é ; s - 18,000 purses 
Cotton . : : - ; : 4*10;,000 3) 8 
Flax and flax-seed . ; : 1 ZOCOR gee 


Transit duty on coffee, ivory, osuEeh feathers, 
gold dust, and other objects of trade, 
from Africa-and from Arabia . = 6g@00 Yi 4; 


Thus Mehemet Ali will be able to abolish all the other duties, taxes, and 
imposts, to deliver the peasants and the working classes from the most cruel 
exactions and fiscal vexations, and to simplify the receipt of the land-tax and of 
the customs, and, by suppressing the innumerable monopolies, give to his adminis- 
tration an equitable, steady, and humane direction. 

_ The above amount of revenues is by no means exaggerated. Mehemet Ali 
himself asserted that the land-tax and customs of Egypt alone, cultivated in the 
manner in which he proposed that it should be as soon as he could put an 
end to his warlike demonstrations, might give him 10,000,000 florins a year, 
after paying the expences of administration and maintenance. 

As there is a question of fixing the amount of tribute which Mehemet 


Ali shall hereafter have to pay for Egypt, it is altogether proper to ttenti 
to the data above set at 7 nae S proper to pay attention 
in Ee Ue eS te 


219 


Sub-Inclosure 2 in No 149. 
BupGer DE L’Keyrre pour L’Exercice 1833. 


Revenus de ? Egypte pendant 1833. 


Francs. 
Miri ou Impét Foncier . e 28,125,000 
- Droit de Capitation, dit Fisdet il Rouse . ‘ : 8,750,000 
Droit du Karatsch . - - 80,000 
Droit sur les Successions,, dit Boel. ma 3 - e 150,000 
Droit sur les Bestiaux destinés a étre abattus 5 ‘ - 250,000 


Droit sur les Okels et Bazars de la Haute Egypte : . 48,000 


Droit sur les Danseuses, les Musiciens, ct les Escamoteurs ‘ 60,000 
Droit sur la Fonte de Argent et des Galons . . 56,250 
Droit sur les Dattiers ; A i . 600,000 
Droit sur Ja Péche du Lac Meizalch < P . 250,000 
Droit sur le Sel, les Barques, et le Poisson 5 A - 438,000 
Droit sur les Céréales . A A 4,500,000 
Produit des Douanes et Droits d’ Gare ‘ x . 3,070,500 
Appalte des Liquides —, : . ‘ 346,000 
Appalte du Séné . - 32,500 


Appalte de la Péche du Lac Keroun, et Droits d'Octroi du_ Fayoum 72,500 
Bénéfices sur Je Coton, l'Indigo, 1’ Opium, le Sucre, le Vin, le Riz, le 

Miel, la Cire, !e Henneh, |’Eau de Rose, la Graine de Lin, de Sé- 

same, de Laitue, de Carthame, la Soie, le Safranum, le Nitre, la 

Chaux, le Platre, et les Pierres, le Natron, la Soude, le Sel 


Ammoniac . ° : : 12,000,000 
Bénéfices sur |’'Hotel des MY anunies : ‘ . 375,000 
Bénéfices sur les Toiles - : . 1,500,000 
Bénéfices sur la Fabriques des Bioffes de Soie * 1,200,000 
Bénéfices sur les Cuirs Bruts et Apprétés. + . - 875,000 
Bénéfices sur la Vente des Nattes . 4 . ‘ 100,000 

Total . 62,778,750 


Etat des Dépenses pendant 1833. 


Francs, 
Envoi d’Argent a poms venumeple ° . . 1,500,000 
Budget de P Armée 5 A 15,000,000 
Traitemens des Officiers Chefs d’Administration : A 5,000,000 
Solde de la Cavalerie Turque Irréguliére : : 812,000 
Solde des Arabes Bédouins : : : 650,000 
Pour le Matériel de Ja Guerre : 1,750,090 
Montant des Rations de Fourrages, Mules, Chamesex : 312,000 
Ecole Militaire. . ’ : 200,000 
Budget du Personnel. de la Mirins é . 7,500,900 
Construction des Batimens de Guerre . 1,875,000 
Frais pour Chantiers de Construction des Barques a Boulae : 412,500 
Entretiens des. Fabriques et Salaires des Ouvriers ‘ 2,750,000 
Entretiens des Employés d’Administration , 5 2,500,000 
Rations de Bouche accordées aux Employés ° : 625,000 
Pensions aux Anciens Moultegims : ‘ , 440,000 
Pensions accordées a plusieurs Arabes 750,000 
' Dépenses pour les Constructions de Palais, de Fabriques, Ponts, Digues 2,250,000 
Objets tirés d’Europe pour les Fabriques_—- . ° 1,875,000 
Dépenses pour |’Entretien des Palais du Vice-Roi . 1,250,000 
Depenses de Bouche du. Vice-Roi 5 "500, 000 
Pour l’Administration des Achats de Gar henuves, Btoffeade Soie, ave 1,750,000 
Dépenses pour les Caravanes des Pélérins “ 250,000 


Total . 49,951,500 


2EF2 


220 


(Translation.) 
Bupcer or Ecyrr ror THE YEAR 1833. 


Revenues of Egypt during 1833. 


Francs. 
Miri, or Wand Tax .. -.. 55s tS, Paty SINE tea aN Lt ee 28,125,000 
Capitation Tax, called Fisdet di Rondsia seen’. ke nobeck 2a /u baer 8,750,000 
Capitation) Paxk.d) cncens -desbew bt pw sate «eosin ew Aeemeees 80,000 
Tax on Inheritance, called Beit-el-mal .......-..-2 eeeeeseseees 150,000 
on Beasts for slaughter +... M205 .c0 ss ce ee ns cccesnseeses 250,000 
on the Markets and Bazaars of Upper Egypt........--++-++: 48,000 
on Dancing Girls, Musicians, and Jugglers ..........++-+5- 60,000 
on Silver Casting’s and Lace .4.0i).5... oviduct ee ots ables 56,250 
OniDates Drees tree ete ie aie smu ccre stele ate ere oetonene 500,000 
on the Fishery of Lake Menzaleh ........2-.0.20000e00- 0 250,000 
onSalts Boats: andsbish soeu siete ee pce toeiee ererterle 438,000 
en Corinth: ooo iiaeda. OE BN ARERR eee 4,500,000 
Produce of Customs, and Municipal Duties... ........02..-0-05- 3,070,500 
Parma Of Liquids sles wi iirsfale ain yates ae oo tie Nas boots ete 346,000 
of Senna.. 32,500 
of the Fishery of Take Ketouti; ahd Municipal Duties ef? the 
Fayounad)). (200-372 DR Ra EE AS AES taco 72,500 
Profits on Cetint Indigo, Opium, Sugar, Wine, Rice, Honey, Wax, 
Henneh, Rose Water, Flax Seed, Sesame, Lettuce, Cardamon, 
Silk, Saffron, Nitre, Lime, Plaster, Stone, Natron, Soda, Sal 
PATAMOMIAC Le es ale see otsloie ees oie ee eae Sie eter e ete erenee 12,000,000 
onatheaMintye;. frat Poche iets ee eee le eee te beaeiote chew 375,000 
On duinenvCloth.c och. ve4 levee wel cages Aevetelow Osiatrseeene ce 1,500,000 
onvsilk Manufactures: . 0.92 ccs e sce oh cea ien ic cleee ae eesnsts 1,200,000 
onerawaanddressedebidesi sete mein eters senocterc tists 875,000 
ont the: sale of Mutst nt. aos. Steere ewe crctoce trate « Smarte 100,000 


Total... .1.4.+ je» 1O2adAoeipu 


State of Expenses during 1833. 


Francs. 

Dloney’sent to Constantinoples isc '6 2%. it PA wletevere ore thes <i, <= 2155005000 
The Army.. seb oie, 0 eh t.0i siepe ei oe 9s ens nee eRe eR LOR OO OLOUO 
Salaries of Superior ‘Ciel Char: Shoplelolous Legelever etic ontvome, tiareheretore tele ehere 5,000,000 
Payor arregulars Purmish Cavalry: <i <pistnckote sissies See serie 812,000 

of they Bedouin Arabs. sc. cits sos wisis site os as ore a oueratedete meters 650,000 
WARY StOVGS 20 te. oes Sane ore eie, ots OM el cane aie oo rea eee 1,750,000 
Charges for Rations of Forage, Mules, and Camels .............. 312,000 
Biiligary"CHOO! ft 0e free Ss Sean eo eink melee Gh. see teens 200,000 
Nayyur te Soke pscivers gotten sR ae. Se eee ee Oke Sree ee 7,500,000 
hips OMI LING e674 Merc SNA «9s, ere ka oo ee Ae ane PRR Co 1,875,000 
Expenses of Ship- Building Establishment at Boulac...... lal ogee as 412,500 
Maintenance of Factories and Wages of Workmen .............. 2,750,000 
Maintenancerot: Civili servants. cele cee eee ees 2,500,000 
Provisions for Civil Servants . oDU AREY Deere See ee 625,000 
Pensions to the old Moultegims . aw ate aly sled ee meetits EM Sen eg eae 440,000 
Pensions granted to bévetal Aydbes) oe) S08 A GCE ey Meee 750,000 
Expenses for Building Palaces, Factories, aero Dikesherstenind: 2,250,000 
Articles obtained from Europe for the Factories . 1,875,000 
Expenses for keeping up the Viceroy’s Palaces .............--05 1,250,000 
Expenses of the Viceroy’s living . ate 500,000 
For the department for the purchase ‘of Cashmeers, ‘Silk “Stuffs, and 

SOWelS co oslatvaeions weiss) d «8 s.chie woreda coe ae 1,750,000 
Expenses, for the /Pilgrim:Caravans wii 's... osrracin dover ates 250,000 


221. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 162. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Baron de Stiirmer. 


(Extract.) Therapia, Thursday, January 28, 1841. 

MY proposition is, that the Sultan shall issue a Firman in the usual form, 
saying, that moved by the submission of Mehemet Ali, His Imperial Majesty 
thinks proper to confer upon Mehemet Ali a signal mark of his Royal favour, 
and he therefore orders that the post of Governor of Egypt shall be hereditary 
in the family of Mehemet Ali, and he commands all his Viziers and officers, &c. 
to attend to this Imperial Ordinance, and to bear in mind that all the Laws of 
the Empire, and all the Treaties of the Sublime Porte, shall apply to Egypt just 
as much as to any other province of the Sultan’s Dominions. 

The object I have in view is to unite in one solemn act the proofs of the 
concession made, and the manifestation of the Sovereign Authority of the Sultan 
by its exercise. 

I propose that this act of authority should be followed in due time by the 
specification of the nature and extent of the administrative powers which the 
Sultan shall think proper to confide to the Governor of Egypt. This last 
measure will require great consideration, for it will be an act of great im- 
portance, and if not done with prudence and firmness, must produce great 
embarrassment, if not put the future tranquillity of this Empire in danger. It 
appears to me that the Firman above mentioned will be a formal termination of 
the Question by the establishment of the principle upon which the Empire is to 
be governed. It asserts and declares the rights of the parties. The exercise or 
the enjoyment of those rights is a separate question, and can be more correctly 
treated when put in its proper place, as derivative from and dependent upon 
the great principles already recognized. 

I presume we shall have time enough to examine carefully and to settle 
this second affair. 

If this proposal should continue to meet with your approbation, and should 
also be approved of by our Colleagues, it might be made the subject of a sug- 
gestion to the Porte, and if concurred in by the Sultan, and carried into execution, 
it would then be proper to forward the Firman to Alexandria to be delivered to 
Mehemet Ali, and a notification of the fact, together with a copy of the Firman, 
might be officially communicated by the Ottoman Ambassador in London to the 
Conference assembled in that Capital. 

I have endeavoured to be as brief as possible, and I have abstained from all 
the minor questions, upon which, however, Ihave much to say when the time 
comes for their discussion. 

Yours sincerely, 


(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 3 in No. 162. 


Viscount Ponsonby to M. Titow. 


My dear Sir, Therapia, January 22, 1841. 

I BELIEVE I shall perform what you desired to have done by giving you 
extracts from Lord Palmerston’s last instruction to me, dated December 17, 
1840, showing the conditions which are to be imposed upon Mehemet Ali. I did 
not understand you to desire the earlier parts of it, which touch the past, and 
direct me to consider submission to have been made, and which assume that all 
is going on satisfactorily. ae 

“It would indeed be necessary, that in reinstating Mehemet Ali in the 
Pashalic of Egypt, care should be taken to make such arrangements as would 
protect the people of Egypt from a continuance of the tyrannical oppression by 
which they have of late years been crushed, and should secure the Sultan 
against a renewal of those hostilities which have compelled him to have recourse 
to the aid of his Allies. But the means of effecting all these purposes may be 


222 


found in the stipulations of the Treaty of the 15th of July, without removing 
Mehemet Ali from his Pashalic. The Treaty says that all the laws of the 
Turkish Empire, and all the Treaties of the Porte, shall apply to Egypt, just as 
much as to any other province of the Sultan’s dominions ; and that the land and 
sea forces which may be maintained by the Pasha of Egypt, shall be part of the 
forces of the Empire, and be kept up for the service of the State. ma 

“Under these stipulations, the Sultan will of course be able, by an exercise 
of his legislative authority, to establish unity of flag and military and naval 
uniform throughout all his provinces; to limit the number of troops which 
each province shall, according to its population, maintain ; to regulate the mode 
of enforcing the conscription, so as to protect the people from undue burthens 
and oppressive levies; to fix the number and the class of ships of war which 
shall belong to the several naval ports of his domimions; to fix the manner in 
which commissions in the Army and Navy shall be granted in his name, and 
by his authority; to determine that a single monetary system shall prevail 
throughout his dominions, and that there shall be but one Mint. The Treaty 
specifies that none but the legal imposts shall be levied in Egypt, which will 
secure the people from undue exactions ; and the execution of the Convention of 
1838, by which all monopolies are to be abolished, will at once free the people 
of Egypt from those oppressive restrictions which have hitherto kept the great 
mass of the population in the most abject poverty, and which have gradually 
thrown out of cultivation extensive tracts of land that were formerly tilled and 
productive. 

«By such means it seems to Her Majesty’s Government, that future security 
might be afforded both to the Sultan and to his Egyptian subjects against the 
disposition of Mehemet Ali to rebel against his Sovereign, and to oppress the 
people of the province he would have to govern.” 

I know my Government is very desirous to have this question settled as 
rapidly as possible, and I hope it may be agreeable to yourself and our Col- 
leagues to proceed with it. I do not see that we have much to do, our line 
being clearly marked out for us. You agreed with me that the Sultan, having 
accepted the restoration of the Fleet as the submission of Mehemet Ali, and 
having declared his intention to give him the Government (Hereditary) of 
Egypt, it is now proper that His Highness should declare his Sovereign 
pleasure, and fix the conditions upon which he grants the Government, and that 
this should be done by a Royal Firman, which should be sent to Mehemet Ali. 

I presume it would be necessary to invite the Porte, as soon as the Firman 
shall have been completed and sent to Alexandria, to order copy of it to be 
officially communicated by the Ottoman Ambassador to the Conference in 
London. 

The conditions recited above are imperative upon me, and I cannot advise 
the Porte except in entire conformity with them; only, Lord Palmerston having 
mentioned the expediency of the Sultan reserving the right to designate the 
individual of the family of Mehemet Ali who shall succeed to the Pashalic, and 
that it should not be left to the governing Pasha to select his successor, that 
might be added. 

I have, &c., . 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 4 in No. 162. 


M. Titow to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Pera, le $4 Janvier, 1841, 

J’AI parcouru avec beaucoup d’attention la lettre de votre Excellence au 
Baron de Sturmer, et je ne saurais assez vous remercier d’avoir bien voulu me 
la communiquer. Nous nous sommes réunis bient6t aprés midi chez M. 
P'Internonce avec le Comte Kcenigsmarck, et tous trois nous avons été d’accord 4 
reconnaitre la prudence et l’opportunité de la proposition émise de votre part. 
i parait utile en effet que le Sultan commence par établir ainsi l’exercice 
general de son autorité souveraine sur Egypte, avant d’aborder les détails, et 


223 


au moment méme out il fera la concession de Vhérédité. La prérogative souve- 
raine serait ainsi confirmée dans toute son étendue, et la porte reste ouverte 
pour'toutes les mesures d’exécution que Sa Hautesse aurait & ordonner par la 
suite. Le Baron de Stiirmer a donc adhéré, comme le Comte Keoenigsmarck et 
moi, au parti d’offrir aujourd’hui des conseils dans ce sens au Ministre Ottoman, 
et il s’est rendu en personne chez Réchid Pacha pour l’y préparer. 

Je suis heureux, pour ma part, d’avoir pu venir ainsi 4 la rencontre de vos 
intentions. Qu’il me soit permis seulement d’émettre ici une remarque faite 
aussi par l’Internonce au sujet de ’hérédité. Dans la lettre par laquelle vous 
avez eu la bonté de me communiquer l’extrait des instructions de Lord Pal- 
merston, votre Excellence opinait qu’il serait utile d’annoncer dés 4 présent que 
Sa Hautesse se réserve de désigner V’individu de la famille appelé chaque fois & 
succéder au Pachalic. Pensez-vous, my Lord, que dans nos conseils il serait 
bon de suggérer dés a présent l’insertion de cette clause restrictive, ou qu’il faut 
s’en tenir 4 la rédaction générale et étendue que vous avez proposée? Votre 
avis 4 cet égard ne manquera pas d’avoir un grand poids pour nous tous. 

Votre, &c., 
(Signe) TITOW. 


(Translation. ) 


My Lord, Pera, January $4, 1841.. 
I HAVE read with much attention your Excellency’s letter to Baron 
Stiirmer, and I cannot sufficiently thank you for having had the goodness to 
communicate it to me. We met soon after midday at the Internuncio’s with 
Count Konigsmarck, and we all three admitted the prudence and the fitness of 
the proposition which you had put forth. It appears in fact advantageous that 
the Sultan should commence by establishing in this manner the general 
exercise of his sovereign authority over Egypt, before entering upon the 
details, and at the same time at which he shall concede the hereditary right. 
The sovereign prerogative would thus be confirmed in its full extent, and the 
door would remain open for all the measures of execution which His Highness 
would eventually have to prescribe. The Baron de Stiirmer then, as well as 
Count Konigsmarck and myself, concurred in offering to-day to the Ottoman 
Minister advice to this effect, and he went in person to Rechid Pasha to 
prepare him for it. ee er 
For my part, am glad to. have had it in my power thus to fall in with 
your intentions. I would only beg however to be allowed to make in this: 
place a remark which was also made by the Internuncio on the subject of the 
hereditary succession. In the letter in which you have had the goodness to 
communicate to me the extract of Lord Palmerston’s instructions, your Excel- 
lency expressed an opinion that it would be useful to announce at the present 
time that His Highness reserves to himself to designate the individual of the 
family who may each time be called upon to succeed to the Pashalic. Are 
you of opinion, my Lord, that in the advice which we shall give, it would be- 
well at the present moment to suggest the insertion of this restrictive clause, 
or that we should confine ourselves to the general and comprehensive wording: 
which you have aoe Your opinion on this point will not fail to have 
weight with us all. 
a ; Yours, &c., 
(Signed) TITOW. 


Inclosure 5 in No. 162. 


Viscount Ponsonby to M. Titow. 


My dear Sir, Therapia, January 29, 1841. 


I HAVE this moment received your letter of the 29th instant; it gives me 
infinite pleasure to learn that yourself and my Colleagues approve of the pro- 
posed plan. 


224 


I reply at once to your question, and I say that I think it will be more 
prudent to keep everything like specific arrangement for the settlement that will 
flow from the assertion and establishment of the Sultan’s sovereign authority and 


right. You will observe that I used the expression, “ hereditary in the family 
of Mehemet Ali,” which cannot tie up the Sultan’s right to specify the mode in 
which the succession shall take place; and if it should be argued hereafter 
that the succession should be in the direct line, (and, as it is called, by repre- 
sentation,) the answer would be easy, that nothing of the sort is known to 
Turkish law, nor is usual in the East, succession being commonly regulated by 
very different principles. 
a do not oS ae inconvenience in leaving this matter untouched, but I do 
fear that any thing that might give Mehemet Ali ground for discussion and 
dispute at this moment, might be inconvenient, and would be seized upon by 
him. He cannot deny the Sultan’s Sovereignty, which he has already admitted ; 
it will be impossible for him to refuse the Hereditary Right, as it 1s expressed, 
without denying, at the same time, the Sovereignty of the Sultan already 


acknowledged. 
I have, &c., 


(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 6 in No. 162. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Baron de Sturmer. 


My dear Baron, Therapia, January 31, 1841. 


THE plan I suggested to you, and which is stated in my letter of the 28th 
instant, and was approved of by you and our Colleagues, was intended by me 
to facilitate and accelerate the settlement of the question with Mehemet Ali: I 
still think it would do so, but as you and our Colleagues have altered your 
opinion, I withdraw it. 

You appear to have misapprehended the operation of the Firman I men- 
tioned, and to have imagined it would occasion delay. I did not so understand 
it, and I do not perceive how it would have prevented any arrangement of the 
conditions being made in half an hour, if determined upon by the Sultan. I 
have seen no cause for delay except in the difficulties inherent in the construc- 
tion of the conditions. As there is no longer question of my plan, I should 
only give you needless trouble by replying to the reasonings contained in your 
letter ; and to spare your time, I will proceed direct to the subject that ought to 
occupy our attention,—namely, the counsel to be given to the Sultan. You 
asked me, ‘‘ Have we a right to act according to our own fancies, when the route 
we have to pursue is clearly traced for us?” My reply is, we certainly have 
not: and, in conformity with your just notions, I will continue to act, without 
the smallest deviation, upon the instructions of December 17, which have already 
been made known to you, but which, to avoid error, I will transcribe literatim 
from the document. 


“It would indeed be necessary, that in reinstating Mehemet Ali in the 
Pashalic of Egypt, care should be taken to make such arrangements as would 
protect the people of Egypt from a continuance of the tyrannical oppression by 
which they have of late years been crushed, and should secure the Sultan against 
a renewal of those hostilities which have compelled him to have recourse to the 
aid of his Allies. But the means of effecting all these purposes may be found 
in the stipulations of the Treaty of the 15th of July, without removing Mehemet 
Ali from his Pashalic. The Treaty says, that all the laws of the Turkish 
Empire, and all the Treaties of the Porte, shall apply to Egypt, just as much 
as to any other province of the Sultan’s dominions; and the land and sea forces 
which may be maintained by the Pasha of Egypt, shall be part of the forces of 
the Empire, and be kept up for the service of the State. 

_ “Under these stipulations, the Sultan will of course be able, by an exer- 
cise of his legislative authority, to establish unity of flag, and of military 
and naval uniform throughout all his provinces; to limit the number of troops 
which each province shall, according to its population, maintain; to regulate 


225, 


the mode of enforcing the conscription, so as to protect the people from undue 
burthens and oppressive levies; to fix the number and claes of ships of war 
which shall belong to the several naval ports of his dominions; to fix the man- 
ner in which commissions in the Army and Navy shall be granted in his name, 
and by his authority ; to determine that a single monetary system shall prevail 
throughout all his dominions, and that there shall be but one Mint. The 
Treaty specifies, that none but the legal imposts should be levied in Egypt, 
which will secure the people from undue exactions; and the execution of the 
Convention of 1838, by which all monopolies are to be abolished, will at once 
free the industry of the people of Egypt from those oppressive restrictions 
which have hitherto kept the great mass of the population in the most abject 
poverty, and which have gradually thrown out of cultivation extensive tracts of 
land that were formerly tilled and productive. 

““ By such means it seems to Her Majesty’s Government, that future secu- 
rity might be afforded, both to the Sultan and to his Egyptian subjects, against 
the disposition of Mehemet Ali to rebel against his Sovereign, and to oppress 
the people of the province he would have to govern.” 


The above constitute the sole rule I can follow, and they are the only words 
i am at liberty to use in the counsel I shall consent to give to the Sublime 

orte. 

Before I conclude my letter, I wish to observe, that you appear to me to ~ 
have misunderstood me on the subject of the Convention of 15th July. What 
I say is, that Mehemet Ali having rejected the offers made to him, the Allies are 
not bound, to Mehemet Ali, to carry those offers into effect, but that the Allies 
are free to act as they think proper, and to vary if they please the conditions to 
be imposed upon Mehemet Ali; and I will avow my opinion to be, that if the 
precise stipulations in the Convention with regard to the terms there offered to 
Mehemet Ali, are to be rigidly adhered to, it will be done in contradiction to the 
other conditions insisted upon by our Governments. 

I am, &c., , 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No. 163. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received February 28.) 


My Lord, Therapia, February 4, 184). 


I THIS day attended a Conference assembled by desire of his Excellency 
the Ottoman Minister for Foreign Affairs, at his house in Constantinople. 

The Minister opened the business of the day by informing the Representa- 
tives of the Four Powers, that he had drawn up a project of conditions to be 
annexed to the grant to Mehemet Ali of the hereditary Government of Egypt, 
which project was prepared with the view of meeting the wishes of the Sultan’s 
Allies, such as the Sublime Porte presumed them to be. ree 

The project was then read, and Rechid Pasha asked the Representatives if it 
‘met with their approbation, and I was called upon to answer first. 

I said, ‘I had no objection to offer to any of the propositions, excepting to 
that which established a tribute, upon which I should have to make some obser- 
vations after my Colleagues had given their answer to the question of his 
Excellency the Minister. My Colleagues then gave seriatim their approbation 
to all the propositions contained in the project. I expressed my regret to be 
obliged to differ from my Colleagues, and proceeded to state, that the question 
being one of extreme gravity, I had thought it expedient to commit to writing 
what I intended to say upon it; and, that as it might be said to be almost based 
upon the assumption that the counsel the Representatives should give to the 
Sublime Porte, must be in exact and rigid conformity with the Convention of 
15th July, I had applied myself first to that topic, and had made some brief 
remarks to show that the Convention is not the absolute rule by which the 
counsels given by the Representatives to the Porte, are to be governed ; and I 
then proceeded to read a French translation of the inclosed paper. , 

When I had terminated, his Excellency the Internuncio entered into an 

2 


226 


examination of parts of what I had said, and concluded by declaring, that the 
Convention is the absolute rule by which the counsels given by the Representa- 
tives to the Porte must be rigidly governed. Count Kcenigsmarck and M. ‘Titow 
followed, and made the same declaration. 

I abstain from reporting to your Lordship the arguments made use of by 
my Colleagues, lest 1 should not do justice to them, and because they will 
appear in the Protocol, with the authority of their Excellencies. There was a_ 
very long discussion, which I have not time to report, and which will also be 
found, no doubt, in the Protocol: and I proceed to state, that the Ottoman 
Minister, after that discussion, asked, what would the Three Representatives 
(who are united in opinion) advise the Sublime Porte to do for ensuring the 
carrying into effect the measure they approved of, viz., the tribute? To this it 
was answered, that the Sublime Porte was the sole judge of that matter. His 
Excellency then asked me how the Sublime Porte should treat Mehemet Ahi, if 
the measure of tribute should not be adopted? I replied, the Porte should treat 
Meheémet Ali as it would treat every other Pasha. 

I must beg your Lordship’s indulgence for my not entering into any details ; 
I have had too much fatigue from exposure to the bad weather and a long 
debate, to be equal to the proper execution of such a work, and I confine 
myself therefore to brief notices of the main facts, by which your Lordship will 
lose nothing ; because the Protocol will give, more or less well, the particulars. 
I took but little share in the discussion on what I considered matters of minor 
importance, as compared with the main question of tribute, being really unable 
to see how any regulations can palliate the evils of it, and hearing nothing in 
discourse that showed others to be more clear-sighted than myself. 

Rechid and Ahmed Fethi and Riza Pashas were present. They are to 
report to the Council, and then to the Sultan; and it is promised that the 
matter shall be speedily decided. 

When the discussion of the tribute was over, Rechid said that Mehemet 
was in possession of the Governments of Dongola, Kordufan, and Sennaar. He 
asked if it was intended to advise the Sultan to give Mehemet Ali the heredi- 
tary Government of them? The Representatives replied unanimously, that those 
provinces did not belong to Egypt, and that the Representatives did not advise 
the hereditary grant: and being asked, what should be done about those pro- 
vinces, they recommended, in conformity with the notion of Rechid Pasha, that 
the Sultan should tell Mehemet Ali, that His Majesty would leave them under 
his government for the present. 

I took this opportunity to speak of the Slave Trade so long carried on by 
Mehemet Ali from those provinces; and I stated the atrocities of the chase (as 
it is called), and the destruction of human life that attends the capture of the 
16,000 Negroes annually caught and sent into Lower Egypt by the officers of 
Mehemet Ali. Rechid Pasha declared his readiness to take the best means in 
his power to put an end to this great evil: but your Lordship must be aware, 
that the Porte cannot do anything to destroy it, unless the power of Mehemet 
Ali be brought under that of the Sultan. 

T request your Lordship will bear in mind, that I did not examine or discuss 
the conditions the Porte proposed to establish for the Government of Egypt, 
but let them pass as being dependent. in many things, upon the question of 
tribute, and therefore destined to be carried into effect, or altered, as the measure 
of tribute should be determined. 

T have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY, 


P.S.—It is out of my power to obtain an official copy of the conditions 
proposed by the Ottoman Minister to be imposed on Mehemet Ali, and I have 
therefore sent a report from memory. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 163. 
Observations addressed to the Conference by Lord Ponsonby. 


, wl BE deposition of Mehemet Ali, and the appeal to the Porte to reinstate 
him, afford proof that the Convention does not bind the Allies in their conduct 


227 


to Mehemet Ali, who, by his refusal of that Convention, destroyed all his right 
to its benefits. Whatever may be granted to Mehemet Ali since, is the result of 
the freewill of the Allies. The Convention, therefore, is not obligatory upon 
the Allies ; in any case they are free to act as they please. My instructions say, 
that the means of protecting the people of Egypt, and of guarding the Sultan 
against the renewal of hostilities, &c., may be found in the stipulations of the 
15th of July, without removing Mehemet Ali from his Pashalic. This clearly 
proves, that Lord Palmerston looks to the Treaty, as affording a source from 
whence may be drawn the means for effecting the purpose stated by him; but it 
is not a declaration by Lord Palmerston, that the. Treaty is to be the absolute 
tule. Tf it is to be so, why is it deviated from in any particular ? 

If the Treaty be not the absolute rule, why are we to counsel the Sublime 
Porte to take a measure that was adopted in that Treaty, at a time when affairs 
were in a state totally different from their actual state? The Treaty was a 
compromise with Mehemet Ali, and all its stipulations were conditional, and 
with aview to engage him to accept it. Mehemet Ali decided to refuse the 
Treaty, and to try the chance of arms. He has been vanquished, and he has 
made unconditional submission to his Sovereign. How then can the Treaty be 
obligatory upon the Allies, (of whom the Sultan is one,) to take the measures 
framed for another position of affairs which has ceased to exist ? 

If then the Treaty be not obligatory upon the Allies, the counsel to be given 
by us to the Ottoman Porte is to be based upon the instructions we have 
received from our Courts ; and we are not to advise the Porte to adopt measures 
that are impossible to be reconciled one with another, and contradictory, so as 
that one measure, if adopted, shall defeat almost every other measure which we 
are ordered to recommend. 

Lord Palmerston’s instructions to me of the 17th have been communicated 
an extenso to my Colleagues, and to the Ottoman Minister for Foreign Affairs. 
They prescribe for me the conduct I am to pursue. They say, ‘‘ Care must be 
taken to make such arrangements as will protect the people of Egypt from the 
tyrannical oppression by which they have of late years been crushed, and as 
shall secure the Sultan against a renewal of those hostilities which have com- 
pelled him to have recourse to the aid of his Allies.” Lord Palmerston says, 
these arrangements may be found in the Treaty of the 15th of July. The 
Treaty says, that all the laws of the Turkish Empire, and all the Treaties of the 
Porte, shall apply to Egypt just as much as to any other province of the Sultan’s 
dominions. 

Lord Palmerston proceeds to particularize the application of the principle 
laid down, to the future character of the military and naval forces of the Empire, 
to the exercise of the Sultan’s legislative authority in the settlement of other 
matters of the most important nature, and concludes with these words :—‘ The 
Treaty specifies, that none but the legal imposts shall be levied in Egypt, which 
will secure the people from undue exactions ; and the execution of the Conven- 
tion of 1838, by which all monopolies are to be abolished, will at once free the 
industry of the people of Egypt from those oppressive restrictions which have 
hitherto kept the great mass of the population in the most abject poverty, and 
which have gradually thrown out of cultivation extensive tracts of land that were 
formerly tilled and productive. By such means, it seems to Her Majesty’s 
Government that future security might be afforded, both to the Sultan and to 
his Egyptian subjects, against the disposition of Mehemet Ali to rebel against his 
Sovereign, and to oppress the people of the province he would have to govern.” 
The fundamental principle of Lord Palmerston’s instructions is, the protection of 
the Sublime Porte from rebellion, and the people of Egypt from oppression, and 
particularly from exactions. on 

The measures which (as I am informed) the Ottoman Minister proposes to 
take for the future Government of Ezypt, appear to me fully in conformity with 
the principle of Lord Palmerston’s instructions, with the exception of one, 
namely, the measure of a tribute, and the consequent abandonment to Mehemet 
Ali of the collection of the revenues of Egypt, to be disposed of by him for the 
maintenance of the civil, military, and naval establishments of that province. 

This measure is in contradiction to the declaration, that all the laws of the 
Empire shall be in force in Egypt; for the law of the Empire is, that the 
Pashas shall not collect the revenues, &c.; but if it be the pleasure of the 
Sultan, he can revoke that law, and pet put an end to that contradiction,— 

2 


228 


an act which I am not authorised to advise the Porte to do, and which, if done, 
would, as I think, open the way for an unceasing succession of mischiefs to the 
Sultan, and the destruction of the great ameliorations lately made, and by which 
the future welfare of the Ottoman people is to be secured. Why not repeal the 
-Hatti-Sheriff of Gulhané ? | 

The principle of Lord Palmerston’s instruction is, protection for the Sultan, 
and for the people of Egypt, against Mehemet Ali. The success of the Sultan’s 
arms has wrested from Mehemet Ali the actual power of the sword ; a power 
which Mehemet Ali created for himself, by the abuse of the revenues of Egypt 
which were placed in his hands. It is proposed to replace them in his hands. 
The revenues of Egypt were raised to their vast amount by the exactions of Me- 
hemet Ali. He is to be left the sole controller of the collection of the taxes, 
and, consequently, sole and absolute master of men, to whom taxation and exac- 
tions leave nothing beyond the mite that is absolutely necessary for their bare 
existence. He can inflict any punishment he pleases, to enforce payment even 
when payment is impossible, and he is the master of the persons as well as of the 
property of the Egyptians. Can this be in conformity with Lord Palmerston’s 
instructions to protect the property of the people of Egypt? It is proposed to 
limit the number of troops to be kept up in Egypt, and that must lead to a dimi- 
nution of the charges on the Pasha. I find in a report made by a scientific man, 
that in the year 1833 the revenues of Egypt amounted to 62,778,750 francs ; 
the. expenses to 49,951,500 francs. 

The residue such a state of finance would leave in the hands of the Pasha, 
over and above all his expenses, would make him richer in money disposable for 
his personal objects, than almost any Sovereign in Europe, without calculating 
the enormous difference of the value of money in Egypt, compared with its value 
in Europe; but when the military and naval expenses of the Pasha are reduced, 
the surplus of the revenue he will enjoy will be largely augmented. Money is 
power, it more particularly is power in these countries ; it has been the instru- 
ment by which Mehemet Ali raised himself to that height from whence it has cost 
so much labour and blood to remove him. Money is the only arm by which he 
can now be mischievous to the Sultan, and it is proposed to give it him in abun- 
dance ; to supply Mehemet Ali with the means of being dangerous to the Sultan 
by extorting money from the wretched people of Egypt, who it is intended also 
to protect from exactions ! 

If the amount of tribute be increased, Mehemet Ali will be only stimulated 
to exact more from the people if that can be obtained by force or fraud, and an 
additional curse will fall upon Egypt. Will these things be guarded against by a 
vast diminution of the taxes in Egypt? How is it to be done, except with the 
concurrence of Mehemet Ali, and his true and loyal assistance in the execu- 
tion of the measure? Does any body expect it? 

The absolute control over the revenue of Egypt gives to Mehemet Ali the 
absolute disposal of rewards and punishments. It makes him the master of the 
persons and fortunes of all. How are the laws of the Empire to apply to Egypt, 
unless by and with his permission and assistance. How is the Hatti Sheriff of 
Gulhané to be enforced against the man who pays every body, from the judge 
to the lowest police officer, and who can at pleasure ruin the pecuniary resources 
of any man, or allow him to subsist or prosper ? 

The Treaties between the Sublime Porte and other Powers may be enforced 
by the fear Mehemet Ali may have of Foreign Nations, but the Sublime Porte 
will be powerless by the action of its own means to compel their observance. 
How are monopolies to be put down in Egypt? Are they to be perpetuated 
by a fraud ? 

These are only a portion of the consequences that will arise from leaving in 
the hands of Mehemet Ali that power which must necessarily belong to him if he 
is to collect the revenues of Egypt, and distribute them, as must be the case if 
the measure be adopted by the Sublime Porte of taking from Mehemet Ali a tri- 
bute in the way proposed. 

It appears to me to be a measure in opposition to the declared end and ob- 
ject of my Government, as they are stated in Lord Palmerston’s instruction of 
December 17. It appears to me, that it is not directed by the Convention of the 
15th July; that it is not now necessary or expedient for the settlement of the 
affairs of this country; that it will confirm and perpetuate the misery of the 
people of Egypt, (being a permanent settlement ;) that it will disgust the moral 


229 


sense of Europe ; and that it is in direct contradiction to the honourable desires 
of the British Government as they are expressed in Lord Palmerston’s instruc- 
tion. I, therefore, have made this declaration of my opinions, and I decline to 
give my approbation to the measure, and to offer my advice to the Sublime 
Porte that such a measure should be adopted. 
I have reason to believe my Colleagues entertain an opinion different from 
mine. ‘They have had before them for their consideration the instructions from 
- Lord Palmerston so often referred to. They are possibly better able to interpret 
them than I may be, but I understand them in the sense I have described ; and it 
is for others, not for me, to decide, and to take such part as they may esteem the 
best. Those whom I have now addressed can judge, as well as I can do, what is 
the opinion of the British Government. My opinion is of little importance ex- 
cepting to myself, but I must stand before my country and justify my acts. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 163. 


Condrtrons on which the Sublime Porte has proposed to grant the hereditary Tenure 
Psi to Mehemet Ali Pasha. 


HEREDITE de l’Egypte accordée A condition que tous les Traités et toutes 
les lois de 1’Empire s’appliqueront a l’Egypte comme a toute autre partie de 
1 Empire Ottoman. 

Le Sultan reste maitre de choisir parmi les descendans males de Méhémet Ali 
qui bon lui semblera. L’héritier choisi au Gouvernement de l’Egypte n’aura 
le titre de Vizir qu’aprés qu’il aura recu l’investiture du Sultan, et c’est apres 
cette investiture qu'il sera nommé Vizir et quw’il sera traité 4 l’instar de tous les 
autres Vizirs de ’Empire. Vu lage avancé de Méhémet Ali, il est dispensé 
de se rendre a la Capitale; ses successeurs y sont obligés. 

La Porte ayant le projet d’améliorer son coin, la monnaie que Méhémet Ali 
pourrait frapper en Egypte devait avoir le méme alliage et le méme cours que 
celle du Sultan. 

Toute nomination aux emplois civils et militaires doit venir du Sultan, et 
toute promotion émaner de Sa Hautesse; dés lors il est défendu a2 Méhémet 
Ali de nommer a aucun emploi, et de pourvoir a aucun office sans l’autorisation 
et le consentement de Sa Hautesse; pourtant, afin de lui laisser un pouvoir d’or- 
ganisation militaire, il lui est accordé de nommer jusqu’au grade de Capitaine 
inclusivement. 

Le tribut A payer annuellement sera fixé séparément. 

Les marques distinctives (Nischan) de tout grade, tant civil que militaire, 
doivent étre décrétées par Sa Hautesse. 

Les uniformes, tant civils que militaires, doivent étre pareils 4 ceux que les 
officiers civils et militaires du Sultan portent, le tout adapté au climat, bien 
entendu que la coupe et la forme doivent étre absolument les mémes. 

Quant a la garnison pour le maintien du bon ordre en Egypte, la Porte 
propose vingt 4 vingt-cing mille hommes de troupes. 

La conscription, qui donne dans les autres provinces un sur cent hommes, ne 
pourra donner en Egypte qu’un sur deux cents hommes. 

De tout tems le Gouvernement de Egypte a été chargé de pourvoir aux 
besoins des Villes Saintes; Méhémet Ali devra donc en sujet fidéle se conformer a 
tout ce que lui impose la place de Gouverneur de l’Egypte. 


(Translation.) 


_ HEREDITARY succession of Egypt granted on condition that all the 
Treaties and all the laws of the Empire shall be applied to Egypt as to every 
other part of the Ottoman Empire. 

The Sultan reserves to himself to choose among the male descendants 
of Mehemet Ali whom he shall please. The heir chosen for the Government 
of Egypt shall not have the title of Vizier until he shall have received the 


lee eae eh ee Thy EE Se Pe ee UE NTR Ce es ee a ee ee 
ow < . i. 


230. 


investiture of the Sultan, and after such investiture he shall be styled Vizier 
and treated like the other Viziers of the Empire. Considering the advanced 
age of Mehemet Ali, he is exempted from proceeding to the capital ; his 
successors are under an obligation to do so. 

As the Porte contemplates an improvement in its coinage, the money 
which Mehemet Ali may coinim Egypt should have the same alloy and value 
as that of the Sultan. 

All appointments to civil and military employments must proceed from 
the Sultan, and all promotions emanate from His Highness; wherefore 
Mehemet Ali is prohibited from appointing to any employment, and making 
provision for any office without the authorisation and consent of His High- 
ness; in order, however, to leave him means of military organisation, he is 
permitted to appoint up to the rank of captain inclusive. 

The tribute to be paid yearly shall be fixed separately. 

The distinctive marks (nischan) of every rank, as well civil as military, 
are to be ordained by His Highness. 

The uniforms, as well civil as military, must resemble those worn by the 
civil and military officers of the Sultan, the whole adapted to the climate ; it 
being well understood that the cut and shape must be absolutely the same. 

With respect to the garrison for the maintenance of good order in Egypt, 
the Porte proposes from 20 to 25,000 troops. 

The conscription which in the other provinces furnishes one man in a 
hundred, shall not in Egypt furnish more than 1 in 200. 

The Government of Egypt has always been bound to provide for the 
wants of the Holy Cities; Mehemet Ali must therefore, as a faithful subject, 
act in conformity with what is imposed on him by the situation of Governor 
of Egypt. 


No. 164. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewed February 28.) 


My Lord, Therapia, February 5, 1841. 
I HAVE the honour to inclose translation of two letters from Mehemet Ali 
Pasha to his Highness the Grand Vizier. 
T have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


TInclosure 1 in No. 164. 
Mehemet Ali to the Grand Vizier. 


(Traduction.) Le 23 Janvier, 1841. 

J’AI eu Vhonneur de recevoir la lettre que Votre Altesse m’a écrite pour 
me faire savoir que lorsque la Sublime Porte aura appris d’une maniére positive, 
ainsi que j’en ai pris l’engagement, que la Flotte Impériale a été envoyée sans 
aucun délai, avec tous les officiers, quelques individus connus exceptés, avec 
tous les équipages, toutes les munitions, et tous les agrés, aprés avoir été con- 
signée au trés-distingué Yaver Pacha, chargé de la recevoir, et que certains 
endroits connus ont été évacués et remis aux Agens de la Sublime Porte, Sa 
Majesté Impériale daignera me réintégrer dans le Gouvernement d’Egypte, ce 
qui est chose résolue, et que son Excellence Mazloum Bey, un des principaux 
Employés du Gouvernement Ottoman, a été chargé de me faire des communica- 
tions essentielles sur ces points. 

Je n’ai pas plutot recu la lettre de Votre Altesse, que, conformément 2 la 
volonté positive de Sa Hautesse, j’ai sans retard consigné la Flotte Impériale, 
J’ai aussi écrit 4 chacune des Autorités Egyptiennes de remettre aux Agens de 
la Sublime Porte les Lieux Saints, ainsi que leurs forts, avec toutes les munitions 
de guerre et de bouche qui s’y trouvaient, et de venir ici. Je leur ai expédié 


mes lettres par ’ Honorable Haji Ahmed Aga, Capidji Bashi (Chambellan) de la 


231 


Cour Impériale, qui était venu ici en mission. J’ai mis de l’empressement & 
faire sortir la Flotte Impérialé du Port d’Alexandrie en employant a cet effet des 
bateaux a vapeur, et dans l’espace de quelques jours on a pu, par la grace de 
Dieu, faire partir les batimens l’un apres l’autre. 

J’ai appris aussi, par une lettre arrivée aujourd’hui de la part de mon fils 
Ibrahim Pacha, la nouvelle positive qu’il a abandonné toute la Syrie, et qu il est 
venu jusqu’a Gaza. Votre Altesse verra donc qu’il n’est plus resté, grace a 
Dieu, la moindre difficulté. 

_ Par une lettre officielle arrivée plus tard 4 Mazloum Bey, j’apprends .qu’au 
moment que la soumission que j’ai faite sera devenue un fait accompli, par la 
prompte restitution de la Flotte Impériale, et la remise, sans aucune délai, 
des lieux dont il s’agit aux Agens de la Sublime Porte, le Gouvernement 
héréditaire de ?Egypte me sera accordé. Or, voila, que Dieu en soit loué, 
yai exécuté a la lettre toutes les conditions de la maniére ci-dessus énoncée. Je 
pric donc Votre Altesse de représenter 4 Sa Majesté Impériale que je fais des 
voeux pour qu’il puisse régner longtems, et que j’attends l’accomplissement de sa 
promesse Souveraine. Votre Altesse aura rendu ainsi un nouveau service signalé 
a un ancien et fidéle ami. 


(Translation.) 


January 23, 184). 


I HAVE had the honour to receive the letter which your Highness wrote 
to me to inform me that when the Porte shall have positively learnt that the 
Imperial Fleet had, as f had undertaken should be the case, been sent without 
any delay, together with all the officers, some known persons excepted, the crews, 
the stores, and furniture, after having been delivered over to the most distin- 
guished Yaver Pasha authorized to receive it, and that certain known places have 
been evacuated and delivered up to the agents of the Sublime Perte, His Impe- 
rial Majesty will be pleased to reinstate me in the Government of Egypt, which 
is a settled thing, and that his Excellency Mazloum Bey, one of the principal 
servants of the Ottoman Government, was directed to make to me essential com- 
munications on those points. 

Ino sooner received your Highness’s letter, than, in confermity with the 
positive will of the Sultan, 1 without delay delivered up the Imperial Fleet. I 
wrote also to each of the Egyptian Authorities to deliver up to the agents of the 
Sublime Porte the Holy Places, as well as their forts, with all the stores and 
provisions therein, and to come here. I despatched my letters to them by the 
Honourable Hadgi Ahmed Aga, Capidgi Bashi (Chamberlain) of the Imperial 
Court, who had come here on a mission. I hastened the departure of the 
Imperial Fleet from the port of Alexandria, employing steam vessels for that 
purpose, and in the space of a few days, it was possible, by the grace of God, to 
despatch the vessels one after the other. 

I have learnt also by a letter which came to-day from my son Ibrahim Pasha, 
positive news that he has abandoned the whole of Syria, and that he has arrived 
at. Gaza. Your Highness then will see that, thanks to God, there has no longer 
remained the slightest difficulty. 

By an official letter which afterwards arrived from Mazloum Bey, I learn 
that the moment that the submission which I have made shall have beei effected, 
by the prompt restoration of the Imperial Fleet, and the delivery up, without 
any delay, to the agents of the Sublime Porte, of the places in question, the 
hereditary government of Egypt will be granted to me. Now then, God be 
praised for it, I have executed to the letter all the conditions in the manner 
mentioned above. I beg then your Highness to represent to His Imperial 
Majesty that I pray that he may reign for a length of time, and that I wait for 
the accomplishment of his sovereign promise. Your Highness will thus have 
rendered a new and signal service to an ancient. and faithful friend. 


232 


Inclosure 2 in No. 164. 
Mehemet Ali to the Grand Vizier. 


(‘Traduction. ) Le 23 Janvier, 1841. 


SA Majesté Impériale ayant ordonné que Fevzi Ahmed Pacha, que son ex- 
Chiahaya Shériff Agi, et Osman Bey, fils de Shériff Aga et ex-Riala Bey (Contre- 
Amiral), ne soient pas envoyés 4 Constantinople, ils sont restés ici, occupés sans 
cesse A faire des voeux pour la conservation des jours et la prospérité de Sa 
Hautesse. Mais ils implorent la grace qu’il leur soit permis de faire venir aussi 
leurs familles ici. Lorsque Votre Altesse aura su la nature de la faveur qu’ils 
demandent, et attendu que 1d et ici c’est tout un, étant les Etats du méme 
Empire, et que s’ils sont séparés de leurs femmes et de leurs enfans, ils en auront 
le coeur navré, j’espeére qu’elle voudra bien, par compassion pour eux, employer 
ses bons offices afin de leur procurer la permission de Sa Hautesse de faire venir 
leurs familles ici. 


(Translation. ) 


January 23, 1841. 


HIS Imperial Majesty having ordered that Fevzi Ahmed Pasha, his late 
Chiaya Sheriff Aga, and Osman Bey, son of Sheriff Aga and late Riala Bey 
(Rear Admiral), should not be sent to Constantinople, they have remained 
here incessantly employed in praying for the preservation of the life, and 
for the prosperity of the Sultan. But they implore the indulgence that 
they may be allowed also to bring their families here. When your Highness 
shall have become acquainted with the nature of the favour which they request, 
and censidering that there and here is all one, the States belonging to the same 
Empire, and that if they are separated from their families and from their children, 
they will be very sorry for it, I hope that you will be pleased, out of compassion 
for them, to employ your good offices in order to obtain for them the Sultan’s 
permission to bring their families here. 


No. 165. 
Viscount Palmerston to Colonel Hodges. 


Sir, Foreign Office, March 2. 1841. 


I HAVE to instruct you to return to Alexandria whenever the 
Austrian, Prussian, and Russian Consuls are ready to do so. As you all 
came away together, you ought to return thither together; and the sooner 
you return the better. 

I am, &c. 


(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 166. 
Sir John Barrow to Lord Leveson. 


My Lord, Admiralty, March 3, 1841. 

I AM commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to send 

herewith, for the information of Viscount Palmerston, copies of a letter and of its 

inclosures from Admiral the Honourable Sir Robert Stopford, containing details 
of the operations in Syria from the 25th of December to the 2nd of F ebruary. 
I have, &c., ; 

(Signed) JOHN BARROW. 


233 


Inclosure in No. 166. 


Admiral Stopford to R. More O’ Ferrall, Esq. 


; ** Princess Charlotte,” at Malta, 
Sir, February 19, 1841. 


BE pleased to acquaint their Lordships, that by despatches I have received 
from the commanding officers of the Allied forces in Syria, containing the details 
of the operations carried on between 25th of December and 2nd instant, it 
appears, that the plan laid down by General Jochmus, in command of the 
Turkish Army, was, to drive Ibrahim Pasha from Damascus, and to force him 
to retreat by the Desert, in place of marching by Gaza, notwithstanding which 
Ibrahim Pasha reached Gaza on the 31st ultimo, by a detour to the southward of 
the Dead Sea, on which some skirmishing had taken place. But, finally, on the 
17th of January the orders arrived from Mehemet Ali for his son to retreat ; 
and corresponding orders to the Allied forces, to grant every facility to that 
measure ; when, after the necessary securities on both sides, a final and Satis- 
factory arrangement was agreed upon, as will appear by Captain Houston 
Stewart of the ‘“‘ Benbow’s”’ letter of the 2nd of February, of which I inclose a 
copy, reserving the more voluminous details for the packet, vid Falmouth, for 
their Lordships’ fuller information. It appears, that in leaving the “ Benbow” 
in charge of the Commander at Beyrout, which he considered it necessary to do, 
Captain Stewart’s presence at head-quarters was of essential service to the 
successful result of the winding up the contest in Syria. 

As I cannot find words to convey the loss sustained by the lamented death 
of that brave and meritorious officer, Brigadier-General Michell, in more ade- 
quate terms than Captain Stewart has expressed in his letter of the 27th of 
January, I shall inclose a copy of that letter, giving me the melancholy 
intelligence of that event, which happened on the 24th ultimo, after only four 
days’ illness, from exhaustion and over-exertion. 

I beg to add, that, by letters from Rear-Admiral Sir John Ommaney of 
the 7th and 10th instant, the Turkish fleet made an attempt to get out of 
Marmorice with Admiral Walker, but, the wind failing, they were obliged to 
re-anchor, and still remain awaiting a wind to proceed to Constantinople. 

, I have, &c., 
(Signed) _ ROBERT STOPFORD, 
Admiral. 


Sub-Inclosure 1 in No. 166. 
Captain Houston Stewart to Admiral Stopford. 


Sir, Gaza, January 27, 1841. 


IT is with deep sorrow that I announce to you the death of Brigadier- 
General Michell, which took place at Jaffa on the 24th instant. Soon after his 
return there, on the 16th instant, from the advance of General Jochmus with the 
Turkish troops, General Michell complained of fever and ague, accompanied by 
great bodily pains, the consequence of numerous severe wounds received in 
former campaigns. He went to bed on the 19th in the afternoon; but, as the 
fever was speedily subdued, no danger was apprehended until about 7, a.m., on 
Sunday the 24th, and at noon his gallant, amiable spirit quitted its earthly tene- 

e, 
ee For the last five weeks we have been constantly together, and it is not easy 
to conceive a more cordial union between two officers of different services, than 
that which it was my good fortune to enjoy with General Michell. I shall ever 
Jament him as one of the best-informed, most straightforward, and excellent of 
men; and if I, who have known him for so short a time, experience so much 
grief for his loss, what must be the feclings of those who have been his friends 


‘and admirers for years ! ea 
I have the melancholy satisfaction to know, that I was of some use and 
2H. 


234 


comfort to my late gallant friend to the very last: and I am glad to be on shore 
on this coast at a time when it requires the utmost exertion of British firmness 
and vigilance, to prevent any unhappy collision which might occur from the 
mutual mistrust which subsists between the Turks and Egyptians. 

Colonel Bridgeman succeeds to the command of our forces, and in him, I 
feel confident, Her Majesty’s service will find an honourable and able director. 

I was obliged to leave Jaffa for this place at 3, a.m., on Monday the 25th; 
but 1 have since heard, that every military and personal mark of honour and 
respect was evinced at Brigadier-General Michell’s funeral there on the 26th 
instant. 

I have, &c., , 
(Signed) HOUSTON STEWART, 


Captain. 


Sub-Inclosure 2 in No. 166, 
Captain Houston Stewart to Admiral Stopford. 


Her Majesty’s Ship “ Vesuvius,” 
Sir, off Jaffa, February 2, 1841. 

AS the “ Dido ” is getting short of provisions and the weather unsettled, I 
‘send her off at once, without waiting for communication with the shore here, 
which the surf will scarcely yet admit of. I embarked on board the vessel at 
Gaza yesterday evening with considerable difficulty. As it is my intention to 
despatch the ‘* Vesuvius ” this evening, calling at Acre and Beyrout, I shall send 
all despatches by her, and merely state to you in a hurried manner, that I left 
Ibrahim Pasha at Gaza. He arrived there on Sunday afternoon, when he 
immediately gave me an audience; and yesterday he gave a letter of assurance 
for the Seraskier, that he meant to comply with his father’s orders by immedi- 
ately evacuating Syria, which I have not the least doubt he will perform ; but it 
will require a little time, unless the wind gets to the eastward, as there have been 
three transports with biscuits for the troops, (and intended to embark the 
women, sick, and wounded,) off Gaza for six days without having been able to 
land anything yet from the great surf on the beach. 

Six Regiments of Cavalry and 2,000 Infantry marched last week to El- 
Arish en route to Egypt. In consequence of the scantiness of the wells in the 
desert, it becomes necessary to regulate the march in small successive columns. 
Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson, R.E., and Lieutenant Loring, R.N., of Her Majesty’s 
ship ‘‘Carysfort,” are now at Gaza, with directions to superintend and report upon 
the progress of the evacuation; and I entertain the hope, that within a fortnight 
from this date, there will not be an armed Egyptian in Syria. 

I hope that Colonel Bridgeman, who is now in command of the forces, in 
consequence of the lamented death of Brigadier-General Michell, will, so soon as 
I can communicate with him, consent to allow the Marines to leave Acre, in 
which case I should direct the “‘ Vesuvius” to take as many as she can conve- 
niently accommodate, and the ‘‘ Magicienne”’ to embark the rest: there will 
still remain the Marine Artillery at Sidon, and the “ Hazard” is not able to 
take them with their guns, but the next vessel may. The “Stromboli” 
returned to Alexandria last night, not having sufficient coals or water to enable 
her to remain off here; and I expect the “ Hecate”? back from Alexandria 
(whither I sent her on the 25th instant, to communicate with Commodore Sir 
Charles Napier, on the subject of the Syrian conscripts at present in the Egyp- 
tian ranks, and to get coals) immediately. Head-quarters here ought not to be 
left without a steamer, as the only vessel which may safely keep the coast. at 
this season of the year. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) HOUSTON STEWART, 
. Captain. 

P.S.—Ibrahim Pasha sent nearly all his guns, women, and children back to 
Egypt by Suez, under Solyman Pasha’s command, with from 3,000 to 4,000 
men. ‘There cannot be less than 18,000 fighting men now at Gaza; the Cavalry 
and horses in excellent condition, and always a large number of Irregular 
Cavalry. 


CL EL ES 


235° 


No. 167. 


Viscount Palmerston to Chekib Effendi. 


Foreign Office, March 4, 1841. 

THE Undersigned, &c., has the honour to acquaint Chekib Effendi, &c., 
that Admiral Sir Robert Stopford, in a despatch dated the 26th of January, has 
communicated to Her Majesty’s Government intelligence that the Turkish fleet 
arrived at Marmorice from Alexandria on the 24th and 25th of January, on its 
way to the Dardanelles; and that Solyman Pasha, commanding the advanced 
guard of Ibrahim Pasha’s army, had arrived at Suez; which place he probably 
reached on the 22nd of January. 

In a further despatch, dated the 19th of February, Sir Robert Stopford 
states that Ibrahim Pasha had himself arrived at Gaza on the 31st of January, 
on his way to Egypt. 

The Undersigned, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 168. 
PROTOCOLE de la Conférence tenue au Foreign Office le 5 Mars, 1841. 


Présens : 


Les Plénipotentiaires 
ad’ Autriche ; 
de la Grande Bretagne; 
de Prusse; 
de Russie; et 
de la Porte Ottomane. 


LES Plénipotentiaires des Cours d’Autriche, de la Grande Bretagne, de 
Prusse, de Russie, et de la Sublime Porte Ottomane, se sont réunis pour prendre 
en considération les rapports recus de Constantinople jusqu’a la date du 4 
Février, ainsi que les communications échangées entre les Représentans des 
Quatre Cours Alliées et le Ministére de la Sublime Porte. 

Il résulte de l’ensemble de ces renseignemens : 

1. Que Méhémet Ali a fait acte de soumission absolu envers son Souverain, 
et a sollicité son pardon. 

2. Que pour preuve de sa soumission, il a restitué la flotte Ottomane, 
laquelle, aprés avoir été duement remise entre les mains des Commissaires 
nommés par Sa Hautesse, a déja quitté le port d’Alexandrie, et est entrée dans 
la Baie de Marmorizza. 

3. Que la Syrie toute entiére se trouve évacuée par les troupes Egyptiennes. 

4, Que l’autorité du Sultan se trouve légalement rétablie et en Syrie et dans 
VTle de Candie. 

5. Que Sa Hautesse le Sultan a daigné accepter la soumission de Méhémet 
Ali, en accordant amnistie pleine et entiére 4 lui, 4 ses enfans, et 4 ses adhérens. 

6. Que déférant aux avis de ses Alliés, Sa Hautesse a daigné annoncer en 
méme tems J’intention de réintégrer Méhémet Ali dans les fonctions de Pacha 
d’Egypte, avec hérédité pour ses descendans. 

Les conditions établies par Vinstruction arrétée 4 Londres le 15 Octobre, et 
par le Mémorandum du 14 Novembre, se trouvent ainsi remplies: le Pacha 
d’Egypte s’est soumis; il a restitué la flotte—évacué le district d’ Adana, la 
Syrie, Ile de Candie—donné les ordres nécessaires pour restituer les Villes 
Saintes ;—finalement, il a obtenu son pardon aprés étre rentré dans l’obéissance 
et le devoir. : d 

En méme tems, l’attente que la Note Collective, adressée 4 Chékib Effendi 
en date du 30 Janvier, avait énoncée, s’est déja réalisée. Les conseils donnés par 
les Représentans des Quatre Cours ont été accueillis par le Sultan avec cette 
confiance que les sentimens d’amitié et aS coopération efficace de ses Alliés avaient 

241-2 


236. 


été faits pour lui inspirer. En conséquence, Sa Hautesse a fait manifester sa 
détermination de faire émaner un firman par lequel l’investiture héréditaire du 
Pachalic d’Egypte serait accordée & Méhémet Ali sur la base des conditions posées 
par l’Acte Séparé annexé 4 la Convention du 15 Juillet; et ce firman devait étre 
communiqué 4 ’Ambassadeur Ottoman 4 Londres, pour étre porte 4 la con- 
naissance des Représentans des Quatre Cours, aprés qu'il aura été revétu de la 
sanction de Sa Hautesse. 

Dans cet état des choses, considérant que les circonstances qui ont motivé 
le départ d’Alexandrie des Consuls des Quatre Puissances ont cessé d’exister,— 
les Plénipotentiaires des Cours Alliées ont jugé que le moment était arrive ou ces 
Agens devraient retourner 4 leur poste. Les Représentans des Quatre Cours a 
Constantinople s’entendront a cet effet avec la Sublime Porte pour fixer le 
moment ot ces Agens se rendront simultanément 4 Alexandrie. 


(Signé) ESTERHAZY. NEUMANN. 
PALMERSTON. 
BULOW. 
BRUNNOW. 
CHEKIB. 


(Translation.) 
Protocol of the Conference held at the Foreign Office, the 5th of March, 1841. 


Present : 
the Plenipotentiaries 
of Austria; 
of Great Britain ; 
of Prussia ; 
of Russia ; and 
of the Ottoman Porte. 

THE Plenipotentiaries of the Courts of Austria, Great Britain, Prussia, 
Russia, and the Sublime Porte, assembled to take into consideration the 
reports received from Constantinople up to the date of the 4th of February, as 
well as the communications which had passed between the Representatives of 
the Four Allied Courts and the Ministry of the Sublime Porte. 

It results from the whole of this intelligence : 

1. That Mehemet Ali has absolutely submitted to his Sovereign, and has 
solicited his pardon. 

2. That in proof of his submission, he has restored the Ottoman fleet, 
which, after having been duly delivered over to Commissioners named by His 
Highness, has already left the harbour of Alexandria and entered the Bay of 
Marmorice. 

3. That the whole of Syria is evacuated by the Egyptian troops. 

4, That the authority of the Sultan is lawfully re-established both in 
Syria and in the Island of Candia. 

5. That His Highness the Sultan has been pleased to accept the sub- 
mission of Mehemet Ali, granting full and entire amnesty to him, his children, 
and his adherents. 

6. That yielding to the advice of his Allies, His Highness has been 
pleased at the same time to announce his intention of reinstating Mehemet Ali 
in his functions of Pasha of Egypt, with hereditary succession for his de- 
scendants. 

The conditions laid down by the instruction settled in London on the 
15th of October, and by the Memorandum of the 14th of November, are thus 
fulfilled ;—the Pasha of Egypt has made his submission ; he has restored the 
fleet,—evacuated the district of Adana, Syria, the Island of Candia,—has 
given the necessary orders for the restoration of the Holy Cities ;—finally, he 
has obtained his pardon after having returned to obedience and to duty. 

At the same time, the expectation expressed in the Collective Note 
addressed to Chekib Effendi on the 30th of January is already realized. The 
advice given by the Representatives of the Four Courts has been received by 
the Sultan with that confidence which the sentiments of friendship and the 
efficacious co-operation of his Allies were calculated to inspire him with. His 


237 


Highness has, in consequence, made public his determination to issue a firman 
by which the hereditary investiture of the Pashalic of Egypt should be granted 
to Mehemet Ali on the basis of the conditions laid down inthe Separate Act 
annexed to the Convention of the 15th of July; and this firman was to be 
communicated to the Ottoman Ambassador in London, to be made known to 
the Representatives of the Four Courts, after it shall have received the sanction 
of His Highness. ~ 

_ In this state of things, considering that the circumstances which led to 
the departure of the Consuls of the Four Powers from Alexandria have ceased 
to exist, the Plenipotentiaries of the Allied Courts have considered that the 
moment was arrived when those Agents should return to their post. The 
Representatives of the Four Courts at Constantinople will, for this purpose, 
come to an understanding with the Sublime Porte in order to fix the time at 
which these Agents shall proceed together to Alexandria. 


(Signed) ESTERHAZY. NEUMANN. 
PALMERSTON. 
¢ BULOW. 
BRUNNOW. 
CHEKIB. 


No. 169. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—-(Received March 7.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, February 9, 1841. 
WE learn the fact that Mehemet Ali has granted to the Admiral Ahmed 
Fevzi Pasha, who delivered up to him the Sultan’s Fleet, an annual appointment 
of 60,000 dollars, and has made him a present of an estate in the Delta worth 
30,000 dollars, and also of the best house in Cairo with four gardens. 
Mehemet Ali has given rewards also to the other officers who aided in 
delivering up the Ottoman Fleet to Mehemet Ali. 


No. 170. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewed March 7.) 
My Lord, Therapia, February 9, 1841. 


I HAVE the honour to inclose herewith for your Lordship’s information, 
translation of an article which has been published in the Turkish Gazette, called 
the ‘‘ Moniteur Ottoman.” 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure in No. 170. 


Publication de 0 Héredité accordée a Méhémet Ali, et de la Solution de la Question 
Turco-Egyptienne. 


(Traduction.) ei atiN ibe 

AINSI qu’il a été annoncé par la Gazette Numéro 216, Son Altesse Méhé- 
met Ali Pacha a offert sa soumission 4 Sa Majesté Impériale; et son Excellence 
Mazloum Bey, un des principaux Employés du Gouvernement Ottoman, et 
Membre du Conseil de Justice, a été envoyé 4 Alexandrie sur un bateau 4 
vapeur tout exprés, pour lui annoncer la bonne nouvelle que si, par suite des 
faveurs signalées dont il a été jusqu’ici l’objet de la part de Sa Hautesse, il 
prouve sa soumission par des faits, il sera réintégré dans le Gouvernement de 
VEgypte. Ona envoyé avec Mazloum Bey le trés-distingué Yaver Pacha, qui 
avait été chargé de la commission de recevoir la flotte Impériale. Tout_cela a 


238 


été porté & la connaissance de Méhémet Ali Pacha par une dépéche que Son 
Altesse le Grand Vizir lui a écrite. 

Par le retour de Mazloum Bey, la Sublime Porte a appris, que le lende- 
main de l’arrivée des Commissaires 4 Alexandrie, Méhémet Ah, pour preuve de Ia 
réalité de sa soumission, et d’aprés engagement qu’il en avait pris, leur a remis 
tout de suite la flotte Impériale ; qu’il a expédié les ordres écrits nécessaires pour 
la remise des Lieux Saints aux Agens de la Sublime Porte ; qu’il a mis tous ses 
soins A faire sortir la flotte Impériale du Port d’Alexandrie dans le terme promis; 
et qu’Ibrahim Pacha s’est tout-a-fait retiré de la Syrie. 

Comme, d’ailleurs, dans sa réponse, Méhémet Ali a donné de nouvelles 
assurances de sa soumission et de son dévouement au Sultan, le tems de l’accom- 
plissement de la Promesse Royale est arrivé; et sa prompte obéissance aux 
ordres Souverains a été fort agréable 4 Sa Hautesse, dont le Trés-Haut veuille 
conserver les jours et augmenter la prospérité et la gloire! 

Mue par cette bonté et cette sollicitude paternelle qui la caractérisent, Sa 
Hautesse, qui a toujours comblé de faveurs les serviteurs de la Sublime Porte, 
veut bien considérer les derniers événemens comme s’ils n’ont jamais eu lieu; et 
non seulement elle a daigné pardonner 4 Méhémet Ali, a ses fils, 4 ses parens, et 
4 tous ses employés, mais voulant aussi user de clémence envers Méhémet Ali, 
et envers ses fils, elle a accordé 4 Son Altesse le Gouvernement d’Egypte hérédi- 
tairement. Mais attendu qu’il faut naturellement qu’un semblable privilége 
W@hérédité soit assujetti & quelques conditions nécessaires, et que la Sublime 
Porte veut que les Egyptiens, qui sont du nombre de ses sujets tout comme leur 
Gouverneur est du nombre de ses serviteurs, jouissent, dans toutes les circon- 
stances, de repos et de tranquillité, il est de la dignité de Sa Majesté Impériale 
de poser, 4 leur égard aussi, quelques principes modeérés. 

En conséquence, la Sublime Porte a résolu de fixer les conditions nécessaires. 
de Vhérédité, et de faire quelques arrangemens qui en sont les suites et les 
développemens. 

On s’occupe done d’un firman qui renfermera les conditions dont il s’agit, 
et qui sera expédié, s’il plait 4 Dieu, dans quelques jours d’ici par un Commis- 
saire ad hoe, . 

Dieu en soit loué! la question Egyptienne est done terminée de la maniére 
qu’on vient de le voir. 

Quant a la flotte Impériale, elle a été conduite au Port de Marmorice, ot 
elle se trouve maintenant. lle est sur le point d’accomplir sa quarantaine, et 
elle viendra ici par le premier vent favorable. 

Remplissons un devoir imposé a nous tous,—celui de bénir sans cesse le 
nom de notre Souverain. 

Cette affaire avait causé une certaine inquiétude dans les esprits ; mais enfin 
en iy heureusement terminée, et c’est ce que nous portons ala connaissance du 
public. 


( Translation.) 


Publication of the Hereditary Right granted to Mehemet Ali, and of the Solution 
of the Turco-Egyptian Question. 


12 Zilhadgé, 1256. 
4 February, 1841. 


AS it was announced by the Gazette, No. 216, his Highness Mehemet Alt 
Pasha has offered his submission to His Imperial Majesty; and his Excellency 
Mazloum Bey, one of the principal servants of the Ottoman Government, and 
member of the Council of Justice, has been sent express to Alexandria in a) 
steam-vessel. to announce to him the good news, that if, im‘ consequence of the 
signal favours on the part of the Sultan of which he has hitherto been the object 
he gives proof of his submission by facts, he shall be reinstated in the eovern. 
ment of Egypt. The most distinguished Yaver Pasha, who had been commis- 
sioned to receive the Imperial fleet, has been sent. with Mazloum Bey. All this 
has been communicated to Mehemet Ali Pasha by a despatch which the Grand 
Vizier has written to him. ) 

The Sublime Porte has learnt by the return of Mazloum Bey, that the day 
after the arrival of the Commissioners at Alexandria, Mehemet Ali, as a proof 
of the reality of his submission and in conformity with the engagement which he 


239 


had made, immediately delivered over to them the Imperial fleet ; despatched 
‘the necessary written orders for the delivery up of the Holy Places to the 
Agents of the Sublime Porte; exerted himself to the utmost to enable the 
Imperial fleet to go out of the harbour of Alexandria within the promised time; 
‘and that [brahim Pasha has altogether retired from Syria. , 

As, moreover, Mehemet Ali, in his answer, has given fresh assurances of 
his submission and of his devotion to the Sultan, the time for the accomplishment 
of the Royal promise has arrived; and his ready obedience to his Sovereion’s 
orders has been very agreeable to the Sultan, whose days may the Most High be 
pleased to preserve, and to augment his prosperity and glory! 

Moved by that goodness and that paternal solicitude by which hes is 
distinguished, the Sultan who has always loaded with favours the servants of the 
Sublime Porte, is pleased to consider the recent events as having never taken 
place, and has not only condescended to pardon Mehemet Ali, his children, 
relatives, and all his servants, but being desirous also of manifesting his clemency 
towards Mehemet Ali, and towards his children, he has granted to his Highness 
the government of Egypt hereditarily. But seeing that it is naturally requisite 
that such a privilege of hereditary succession should be subject to some necessary 
conditions, and that the Sublime Porte desires that the Egyptians, who are 
among the number of its subjects, in the same manner as their Governor is 
among the number of its servants, should enjoy under all circumstances repose 
and tranquillity, it consists with the dignity of His Imperial Majesty to lay 
down, with regard to them also, some moderate principles. 

In consequence, the Sublime Porte has decided upon fixing the conditions 
necessary for the hereditary succession, and to make certain arrangements which 
are the consequence and explanation thereof. 

A firman is therefore in preparation which will comprehend the conditions 
in question, and which, God willing, will be despatched from hence in a few 
days by a special Commissioner. 

The Egyptian Question is then, God be praised, ended in the manner 
which has been seen. . 

As for the Imperial fleet it has been brought to the harbour of Marmorice, 
where it now is. It is on the point of completing its quarantine, and it will 
come here with the first favourable wind. 

Let us fulfil a duty imposed upon us all, that of incessantly blessing the 
name of our Sovereign. 

This matter had caused some uneasinessin the minds of men; but at length 
it is happily brought to a conclusion, and that is what is communicated to 


the public. 


No. 171. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received March 10.) 


(Extract.) | Therapia, February 14, 1841. 


I HAVE the honour to inclose translation of, 
1. A firman, granting to Mehemet Ali the hereditary Government of 
Egypt, and setting forth the conditions the Sublime Porte attaches to the 


rant; 
5 2. A firman, conferring upon Mehemet Ali the government of the 


provinces bordering upon Egypt; 
3. An Official Note addressed by the Sublime Porte to the Represen- 


tatives of the Four Powers; 

4. A letter from the Grand Vizier to Mehemet Ali. 

At six o’clock yesterday evening, I received a report from the Drago- 
man, stating, that he had received the above-mentioned papers from 
Rechid Pasha, and that they should be translated and sent to me as 
quickly as possible. He further informed me, that the originals of the 
firmans and the letter would be despatched this day at noon, in a steamer 
for Alexandria, and that the Consuls might profit of the occasion to 


return to Alexandria. 


240 


I inclose the Dragoman’s report. 

I received on the 9th instant a message from Rechid Pasha, as 
follows :— I am preparing a firman which will contain the conditions. I 
have a plan, which appears to me excellent for conciliating the opinions 
of the three Representatives with that of Lord Ponsonby, with respect to 
the tribute ; I intend to communicate the project of the firman confiden- 
tially to Lord Ponsonby.” 

The Dragoman continues :—“Rechid has not told me what he has 
found, or believes he has found, to conciliate the above opinions. Rechid 
has told me that when the firman shall be definitively settled, he will 
invite the Representatives to a Conference and communicate the firman 
to them, after which he will ask them this question:—‘If Mehemet Ali 
does not accept these conditions, what do you intend to do?” 

What I have stated above will show, that it has not been in my power 
to take any part in this measure, which has been concealed from me. 
Considering the relations between the British Government and the Sublime 
Porte, it appears to me, that the Ottoman Minister for Foreign Affairs 
ought to have made Her Majesty’s Ambassador acquainted with the mea- 
sures taken by the Porte in this serious affair, before they were actually 
carried into execution. 

I have replied to the Ottoman Minister’s offer to allow the British 
Consul-General to go to Alexandria by the steamer, that I did not intend 
to require the Consul-General to go there. I have to request your Lord- 
ship’s instructions on the above-mentioned point. 

The situation of Egypt will be essentially changed in relation to 
Her Majesty’s Government, if Mehemet Ali accept the terms declared in 
_.the firman, and Syria is separated from Egypt. It may not suit Her 
Majesty’s Government to re-establish the British Consul in Egypt on the 
same footing he lately stood on. Mehemet Ali may refuse the conditions; 
and, lastly, it is impossible, I presume, for Colonel Hodges to leave this at 
so short a warning. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 171. 


[See Inclosure 2 in No. 172.] 


Inclosure 2 in No. 171. 


[See Inclosure 3 in No. 172.] 


Inclosure 3 in No. 171. 


[See Inclosure 5 in No. 172.] 


Inclosure 4 in No. 171. 
[See Inclosure 4 in No. 172.] 


24] 


Inclosure 5 in No. 171. 
M. Frederic Pisani to Viscount Ponsonby. ° 


Péra, ce 15 Février, 1841, 
My Lord, | a 2h. PM. 

JE viens de Réchid Pacha. I] m’a remis quatre piéces: 1° Le firman 
accordant Vhérédité avec lés conditions; 2°. Le firman conférant 4 Méhé- 
met Ali les autres provinces confinantes avec l’Egypte; 3°. Une Note 
Officielle (en Turc) adressée aux Quatre Représentans; 4°. Une lettre 
du Grand Vizir 4 Méhémet Ali. Les originaux partiront demain pour 
Alexandrie. C’est Said Muhib Effendi, le Ministre de la Justice, qui en 
sera le porteur. Réchid Pacha fait savoir a votre Excellence que les 
Consuls qui voudraient profiter de cette occasion pour retourner 4 Alex- 
andrie, pourront le faire. Le pyroscaphe partiradans laprés-midi sans 
faute. 

Je vais commencer la traduction des quatre piéces, et je vous 
enverrai une partie de mon travail 4 mesure que j’avance. 

j Je suis, &c., 
(Signé) FREDERIC PISANI. 


(Translation.) 


My Lord, Pera, February 15, 1841, 2 p.m. 
I HAVE just come from Rechid Pasha. He delivered four papers to me: 


1°. The firman granting the hereditary succession with the conditions; 2°. The 
firman conferring on Mehemet Ali the other provinces bordering upon Egypt ; 
3°. An Official Note (in Turkish) addressed to the Four Representatives; 4°. A 
Letter from the Grand Vizier to Mehemet Ali. The originals will go to-morrow 
to Alexandria. Said Muhib Effendi, the Minister of Justice, will be the bearer 
of them. Rechid Pasha acquaints your Excellency that the Consuls who might 
wish to profit by this opportunity to return to Alexandria, may do so. The 
steamboat will take its departure in the afternoon without fail. 
I am going to begin the translation of the four papers, and I will send you 
parts of my work as I proceed with it. - 
Iam, &c., 
(Signed) FREDERIC PISANI. 


No. 172. 
Chekib Effendi to Viscount Palmerston. 


11 Mars, 1841. 


LE. Soussigné, Ambassadeur de la Sublime Porte, a Phonneur d’in- 
former son Excellence Lord Palmerston, qu’en conséquence des preuves 
que Méhémet Ali a données de sa soumission, Sa Hautesse vient d’ac- 
complir gracieusement sa promesse, en le réintégrant sous certaines 
conditions au poste du Gouvernement héréditaire de l’Kgypte, et en lui 
confiant Vadministration de Nubie, Darfour, Cordofan, et Senaar; que 
Muhib Effendi, Ministre de la Justice, était parti pour Alexandrie, 
chargé, 1°. des deux firmans concernant investiture de Méhémet Ali 
Pacha des Gouvernemens des susdites provinces; 2°. d’une Ordonnance 
relative aux arriérés des tributs; 3°. d’une lettre du Grand Vizir a 
l’adresse du Pacha d’Egypte. ; 

Sur Pautorisation de son Gouvernement, le Soussigné s’empresse de 
remettre 4 son Excellence Lord Palmerston les copies des dites piéces 
ainsi que celles des deux actes adressées_ par la Sublime Porte aux 
Représentans a Constantinople des Cours Alliées et Amies. I prie, en 
méme tems, son Excellence de ag ces copies ala connaissance des 


242"° 


autres Plénipotentiaires des Puissances Alliées 4 Londres, et de vouloir 
bien lui donner une réponse au sujet de la communication officielle. 
Le Soussigné prie aussi son Excellence Lord Palmerston d’agréer 
Vassurance de sa haute considération. ; 1 
(Signé) CHEKIB. 


(Translation.) 


March 11, 1841. 


THE Undersigned, Ambassador from the Sublime Porte, has the honour to: 
inform his Excellency Viscount Palmerston, that, in consequence of the proofs 
which Mehemet Ali has given of his submission, His Highness has graciously 
fulfilled his promise, by reinstating him upon certain conditions in the post of 
the hereditary government of Egypt, and by. confiding to him the administration 
of Nubia, Darfour, Cordufan, and Sennaar; that: Muhib Effendi, Minister of 
Justice, had gone to Alexandria charged, 1°., with the two firmans concerning 
the investiture of Mehemet Ali Pasha in the government of the above-mentioned 
Provinces; 2°., with an ordinance relative to the arrears of tribute; 3°., with a 
letter from the Grand Vizier to the address of the Pasha of Egypt. 

_. By authority from his Government, the Undersigned hastens to transmit to 
his Excellency Lord Palmerston copies of the documents in question as well as of 
the two notes addressed by the Sublime Porte to the Representatives of the 
allied and friendly Courts at Constantinople. At the same time he requests his 
Excellency to communicate these copies to the other Plenipotentiaries of the 
Allied Powers in London, and to have the goodness to give him an answer upon 
the subject of the official communication... - ' * 

The Undersigned also requests his Excellency Lord Palmerston to accept. 


2 . . . 
the assurance of his high consideration. 


(Signed) CHEKIB. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 172. 


Instructions given to his Excellency Said Muhib Effendi, on a Mission 
to Egypt, by order of His Highness the Sultan. 


(Traduction.) 


SAID MUHIB EFFENDI se rendra directement 4 Alexandrie sur le 
bateau 4 vapeur Impériale qui a été mis a sa disposition. 

I] remettra 4 son Excellence Méhémet Ali Pacha, le firman relatif 4 
Phérédité de VEgypte; celui concernant la concession des Provinces de 
Soudan et contenant quelques autres ordres; enfin, la lettre de Son Altesse 
le Grand Vizir. [1 lui représentera en termes convenables que ces contes- 
tations et démélés qui existaient depuis quelque tems étant entiérement 
écartés, il n’y aura plus désormais aucune espéce de division ou de dissen- 
timent, et qu'il faudra travailler en parfaite union pour le bien de la 
religion, du Gouvernement, du pays, et de la nation. I est naturellement 
nécessaire que les dits firmans soient lus officiellement en plein Divan, et 
rendus aussi public. Si Méhémet Ali Pacha exécute cette mesure spon- 
tanément, cela sera fort bien. Dans le cas contraire, le dit Effendi devra 
l’y exhorter en lui faisant les représentations nécessaires. 

Il a été remis au dit Effendi le Nichan et le Fess, distinctifs des 
Vizirs, destinés pour son Excellence Méhémet Ali Pacha, et il sera néces- 
Saire que ce dernier les mette le jour de la lecture du firman. 

Dans le cas cependant ow il ne se montrerait pas disposé A le faire, le 
dit Effendi devra l’y exhorter. 

_ Dans le firman relatif 4 Phérédité, il est dit et établi comme condi- 
tion, que dorénavant les Gouverneurs de Egypte auront 4 se rendre en 
personne a Constantinople pour recevoir l’investiture. Toutefois Sa Hau- 
tesse ayant égard a l’age avancé de Méhémet Ali Pacha, et mue par un senti- 
ment d’humanité et de compassion, ne consent pas a ce qu’il s’expose aux 
fatigues d’une pareil voyage. 


243 


En annongant ceci 4 Méhémet Ali Pacha, on devra ajouter, dans les 
termes convenables, que Sa Hautesse verrait avec satisfaction quwil envoyat 
ici un de ses fils pour la remercier de l’insigne faveur dont il vient d’étre 
Lobjet. | 

Méhémet Ali Pacha devra accepter et exécuter immédiatement et 
sans objection toutes les conditions du firman relatives a l’hérédité ainsi 
que toutes les dispositions contenues dans notre firman Impérial. 

Si toutefois, contre notre attente, il devait étre heurté par quelques 
unes des dites conditions, et qu’il montrat de ’hésitation, le dit Effendi lui 
représentera, en termes persuasifs, que ces résolutions de Sa Hautesse 
sont définitives, qu’aucune d’entre elles ne saurait étre changée ou 
modifiée, et qu’aussi les Augustes Cours Alliées ne donneraient pas leur 
assentiment. 

Si le Pacha ne se laisse pas convaincre, et qu’il persiste dans son 
opinion, on tachera de le faire entrer dans la bonne voie, en lui exposant 
quilest de son intérét de terminer, sans provoquer de nouveau l’emploi 
des mesures coércitives ; que si on était foreé de recourir encore une fois 
a la guerre, il serait seul responsable du sang humain qui y serait versé ; 
enfin, que la non-acceptation dune des conditions établies portera 
atteinte 4 ’hérédité qu’on vient de lui accorder comme une insigne faveur. 

Arrivé 4 Alexandrie, le dit Effendi comprendra dans la premiére 
ou dans la seconde entrevue quelle est la marche que compte suivre 
Méhémet Ali. 

Si, aprés cing ou six jours, sa mission se trouve terminée 4 souhait, il 
aura a s’en retourner aussitét 4 Constantinople. 

Si, au contraire, l’affaire lui paraissait exiger encore de longues 
discussions, et qu’il fat obligé de rester a Alexandrie quinze ou vingt 
jours, alors, comme il faut que nous connaissions ici la marche que 
Méhémet Ali suivra dans le principe, et le langage qw il tiendra, le dit 
Effendi pourra renvoyer ici le bateau 4 vapeur Impérial avec un rapport 
contenant les notions qu’il aura recueillies en quelques jours dans ses 
-entrevues avec Méhémet Ali Pacha. Dans le cas, enfin, que Méhémet Ali 
ne prit en aucune considération les ouvertures du Délégué de la Sublime 
Porte, et qu'il rejetat entiérement Jes conditions qu’on lui offre, alors, 
comme il faudra de nouveau concerter cette affaire avec les Cours Alliées, 
le dit Effendi devra exposer au Pacha la nécessité de lui donner par écrit 
son refus d’accepter les conditions en question. I] lui fera donc écrire 
clairement tout ce qu’il aura a dire, et soumettra cette piéce a la Sublime 
Porte, dont il devra attendre la réponse. 

Le dit Effendi étant porteur de notre firman Impérial relatif aux 
arriérés des tributs de ?Egypte et de Vile de Candie et de la Syrie, il est 
évident que Méhémet Ali Pacha ne pourra rien objecter, mais qu’il devra 
payer en entier le tribut de Egypte et de Candie jusqu’a la fin de l’année 
courant, et celui de la Syrie jusqu’a la fin de année 1255 (4 Mars, 1840). 
Cependant, si Méhémet Ali avait lintention de garder ces arrérages a 
compte des frais que lui a occasionnés le séjour de la flotte Impériale a 
Alexandrie, on lui fera observer que le voyage et le séjour de cette flotte 
en Egypte ayant eu lieu contre la volonté du Sultan, la Sublime Porte 
ne doit pas supporter les frais que cela a occasionné; que cela serait 
d’ailleurs contraire au Traité conclu entre les Augustes Cours, puisqu’il 
est stipulé qu’on ne demandera aucune espéce de frais pour lentretien de 
la flotte en question; que, par conséquent, on ne pouvait pas permettre 
que les arriérés du tribut fussent retenus par un pareil motif, et qu il 
fallait que Méhémet Ali les acquittat sans délai, et réglat ainsi ce point 
d’une maniére définitive. 

Si le Pacha alléguait, qu’A cause de la guerre il s’est trouvé dans 
Vimpossibilité de prélever en entier les impéts de la Syrie, et qu il propose 
de ne pas confondre ce point avec les autres arriérés, mais de les régler 
séparément, on lui répondra qu’en effet la Sublime Porte devra recevoir de 
lui tout ce qu’il lui a été possible de prélever en Syrie dans la dite année, 

-gauf a percevoir en suite le reste sur les lieux mémes d’apres les docu- 

-mens authentiques que devra lui fournir le Pacha. Dans le cas, enfin, ou 

il serait de toute impossibilité d’arranger a Alexandrie Vaffaire du tribut 

de la Syrie pour la présente oe rie on établira que Méhémet Ali 
2 


244 


Pacha enverra ici un Commissaire ad hoc, avec lequel ce point sera réglé 
dans les voies financiéres. 

Quant au passage du dit firman d’hérédité ot il est question du 
contréle, en voici le sens et le but. Comme le quart des revenus de 
VEgypte doit revenir a la Sublime Porte, et que les imp6ts a payer par les 
habitans de lEgypte doivent étre conformes aux nouvelles lois de 
VEmpire, il faut que l’on connaisse ici exactement le chiffre des revenus 
effectifs de Egypte, ainsi que la maniére dont y sont traités les habitans, 
et c’est aA cet effet que la Sublime Porte veut y envoyer un employé qui 
devra y résider. Cet employé ne prendra aucune ingérence directe dans 
les perceptions des impéts, ni dans les dépenses; sa mission se bornera a 
constater les faits, et 4 recevoir les sommes qui reviennent 4 la Sublime 
Porte. Il n’y a donc rien dans tout ceci qui doive donner de l’ombrage 
Méhémet Ali. Mais, quand méme il hésiterait 4 y consentir, on devra lui 
faire observer qu’on ne saurait changer ce point arrété d’une maniére 
définitive.. On ajoutera en termes convenables, qu’aprés avoir concerté 
la chose avec lui, la Sublime Porte enverra en Egypte un employé, 
2 qui (puisqu’il sera chargé de recevoir les sommes qui reviennent au 
Sultan) il sera convenable de donner le titre de Tefterdar. 

Dans une des lettres de Méhémet Ali Pacha arrivées ici par Mazloum 
Bey, il a demandé que puisque le transfuge Ahmed Pacha, ainsi que 
Chérif Aga et Osman Bey, doivent étre restés en Egypte, on y envoyat 
aussi leurs familles ; on n’entend pas rejeter cette demande. . Mais lorsque, 
en dernier lieu, la Sublime Porte a ordonné 4 Méhémet Ali, par l’inter- 
médiaire de Mazloum Bey, d’expédier ici les harems de Sélim Pacha et de 
Muhib Effendi qui se trouvent 4 Constantinople, il a été répondu que la 
femme de Sélim Pacha étant une parente de Méhémet Ali, et le harem de 
Muhib Effendi n’étant pas content de lui, on ne pouvait pas les forcer 
a venir ici. Or, le harem de Sélim Pacha pourrait se rendre 4 Constan- 
tinople sauf 4 retourner en suite en Egypte, s'il le désire. Et quant 
alautre harem, quand méme il ne serait pas content, il n’est pas con- 
venable qu’il reste la, tandisque Muhib Effendi lui-méme se trouve ici. 
Bref, il faut que ce harem, ainsi que le Miri Aloi Ibrahim Bey, dont on a 
derniérement demandé le renvoi, soient expédiés, en tout cas, 4 Constan- 
tinople. C’est de leur arrivée ici que dépendra le renvoi en Egypte des 
familles des dits transfuges. 

Le Commissaire, Muhib Effendi, devra donc exposer convenablement 
tout cecia Méhémet Ali Pacha, et travailler 4 ce que les deux harems 
susmentionnés, et [brahim Bey, soient envoyés ici. 

Sile premier régiment des troupes de marine, et celui de la milice 
urbaine de Brousse, qui est parti avec la flotte Impériale, ont ét¢ dirigés et 
remis au quartier-général Ottoman, lors de l’évacuation de la Syrie par 
les troupes Egyptiennes, les intentions de la Sublime Porte se trouveraient 
déja étre remplies. Si, au contraire, ils ont été retirés dans l’intérieur 
de Egypte avec les troupes Egyptiennes, il faudrait a présent les 
renvoyer a Constantinople. 

Pour le cas, donc, ott les deux regimens susmentionnés n’auraient pas 
été remis au quartier-général Ottoman, le dit Commissaire avisera aux 


moyens de les faire envoyer ici avec tous leurs officiers, soldats, et 
munitions. 


(Translation.) 


SAID MUHIB EFFENDI will repair direct to Alexandria in the 
Imperial steam-vessel which has been placed at his disposal. 

He will deliver to his Excellency Mehemet Ali Pasha the firman relative to 
the hereditary succession in Egypt; that concerning the concession of the 
provinces of Soudan and containing some other orders; lastly, the letter from 
his Highness the Grand Vizier. He will represent to him, in suitable terms, that 
those disputes and differences which have existed for some time past, being 
entirely removed, there will henceforward be no sort of division or dissension, 
and that it will be necessary to work in perfect union for the welfare of religion, 
of the Government, of the country, and of the nation. It is naturally necessary 


245 


that the firmans im question should be officially read in full Divan, and also made 
public. If Mehemet Ali Pasha executes this measure spontaneously, it will be 
very well. In the contrary case, the said Effendi must exhort him to do sO, 
making the necessary representations to him. 

WE There have been delivered to the said Effendi the Nichan and the Fess, which 
distinguish the Viziers, destined for his Excellency Mehemet Ali Pasha, and it 
will be necessary that the latter should put them on on the day on which the 
firman shall be read. 

In case, however, he should not appear disposed to do so, the said Effendi 
must exhort him thereto. 

In the firman relative to the hereditary succession, it is stated and laid down 
as a condition, that hereafter the Governors of Egypt will have to repair in 
person to Constantinople to receive the investiture. However, His Highness, in 
consideration of the advanced age of Mehemet Ali Pasha, and moved by a feeling 
of humanity and compassion, is not willing that he should expose himself to the 
fatigue of such a voyage. 

In announcing this to Mehemet Ali Pasha, it must be added, in suitable 
terms, that His Highness would see with satisfaction that he sent one of his sons 
here to thank His Highness for the signal favour of which he has just been the 
object. 

Mehemet Ali Pasha must accept and execute immediately and without 
objection all the conditions of the firman which relate to the hereditary succession, 
as well as all the orders contained in our Imperial firman. 

If, however, contrary to our expectation, he should be offended with some of 
those conditions, and if he should show any hesitation, the said Effendi will 
represent to him, in persuasive terms, that these resolutions of His Highness 
are definitive, that not one of them can be changed or modified, and that, more- 
over, the august Allied Courts would not give their assent. 

If the Pasha will not allow himself to be convinced, and if he should persist 
in his opinion, attempts must be made to induce him to follow the right course, 
by declaring to him that it is his interest to close, without provoking afresh the 
employment of coercive measures; that if it was necessary again to have 
recourse to war, he alone would be responsible for the human blood which would 
in consequence be shed; in short, that the non-acceptance of one of the esta- 
blished conditions will be prejudicial to the hereditary right which has just been 
granted to him as a signal favour. 

When the said Effendi has arrived at Alexandria, he will perceive in the 
first or second interview what is the course which Mehemet Ali intends to 
follow. 

If, in five or six days’ time, his mission terminates to his satisfaction, he 
will have to return without delay to Constantinople. 

If, on the contrary, the affair should appear to him still to require long discus- 
sions, and that he should be obliged to remain at Alexandria fifteen or twenty days, 
then, as it is necessary that we should know here the course which Mehemet Ali 
may follow in the first instance, and the language which he may hold, the said Effendi 
may send back the Imperial! steam-vessel with a report containing the information 
which he may have gathered durmg some days in his interviews with Mehemet 
Ali Pasha. Lastly, in case Mehemet Ali should in nowise take into considera- 
tion the overtures of the delegate of the Sublime Porte, and should wholly 
reject the conditions which are offered to him, then, as it will be necessary to 
concert afresh with the Allied Courts upon this affair, the said Effendi will point 
out to the Pasha the necessity of his giving him in writing his refusal to accept 
the conditions in question. He will then make him write clearly all that he may 
have to say, and he will submit the paper to the Sublime Porte, for whose answer 
he will wait. 

The said Effendi being the bearer of our Imperial firman relative to the 
arrears of tribute of Egypt, of the Island of Candia, and of Syria, it is evident 
that Mehemet Ali Pasha must offer no objection, but that he must pay the whole 
of the tribute of Egypt and of Candia up to the end of the current year, and 
that of Syria up to the end of the year 1255 (March 4, 1840). However, if 
Mchemet Ali had intended to keep these arrears on account of the expence 
which has been occasioned to him by the stay of the Imperial fleet at Alexandria, 
it will be pointed out to him that the voyage to, and the stay in, Egypt of that fleet 
having taken place against the will of the Sultan, the Sublime Porte should 


246 


not bear the expence which that has occasioned ; that that would, moreover, be 
contrary to the Treaty concluded between the august Courts, since it is stipu- 
lated that no sort of charge shall be made for the support of the fleet in question ; 
that, consequently, it could not be permitted that the arrears of tribute should 
be retained for such a reason, and that it is necessary that Mehemet Ali should 
discharge them without delay, and should thus settle this point in a definitive 
manner. 

If the Pasha should allege, that on account of the war it was impossible for 
him to levy the whole of the imposts of Syria, and that he proposes not to con- 
found this point with the other arrears, but to settle them separately, he must be 
answered, that in fact the Sublime Porte must receive from him all which it has 
been possible for him to raise in Syria in the said year, without prejudice to its 
afterwards collecting the remainder upon the spot according to the authentic 
documents which must be furnished to it by the Pasha. Lastly, in case of its 
being wholly impossible to arrange at Alexandria the affair of the tribute of 
Syria for the present year 1256, it will be settled that Mehemet Ali Pasha shall 
send here a Commissioner ad hoc, with whom this point shall be arranged 
as a matter of account. 

With respect to the passage in the above-mentioned firman as to the here- 
ditary succession in which there is a question of the control, this is the meaning 
and the object of it. As the quarter of the revenues of Egypt is to revert to the 
Sublime Porte, and as the imposts to be paid by the inhabitants of Egypt must 
be in conformity with the new laws of the Empire, it is necessary that it should 
be known here what is exactly the amount of the effective revenues of Egypt, 
as well as the manner in which the inhabitants are treated there, and it is for 
this purpose that the Sublime Porte wishes to send an agent who should reside 
there. That agent will take no direct part in the levying of the imposts, nor in 
the expences ; his mission will be confined to ascertaining facts, and receiving 
the sums which revert to the Sublime Porte. There is, then, nothing in all this 
which ought to give umbrage to Mehemet Ali. But, even if he should hesitate 
to consent thereto, he must be made to observe that this point, decided upon in 
a definitive manner, cannot be changed. It must be added, in suitable terms, 
that, after having settled the affair with him, the Sublime Porte will send an 
agent to Egypt, to whom (as he will be commissioned to receive the sums which 
revert to the Sultan) it will be proper to give the title of ‘Tefterdar (Treasurer), 

In one of the letters from Mehemet Ali Pasha, which arrived here by 
Mazloum Bey, he requested that, since the deserter Ahmed Pasha, as well as 
Sheriff Aga and Osman Bey, have had to remain in Egypt, their families should 
also be sent there; it is not intended to refuse this request. But when, lately, 
the Sublime Porte commanded Mehemet Ali, through the medium of Mazloum 
Bey, to send here the harems of Selim Pasha and of Muhib Effendi who are at 
Constantinople, it was answered that the wife of Selim Pasha being a relation 
of Mehemet Ali, and the harem of Mubib Effendi not being pleased with him, 
they could not be forced to come here. Now, the harem of Selim Pasha might 
repair to Constantinople with the power of returning afterwards to Egypt, if it 
wishes to do so. And as to the other harem, if even it should not be satisfied, 
it is not proper that it should remain there, while Muhib Effendi himself is here. 
In short, it is necessary that this harem, as well as the Miri Aloi Ibrahim Bey, 
whose dismissal was lately required, should be sent, in any case, to Con- 
stantinople. Upon their arrival here will depend the return of the families of 
the above-named deserters to Egypt. 

The Commissioner, Muhib Effendi, will, then, suitably explain all this to 
Mehemet Ali Pasha%and exert himself so that the two harems above-mentioned, 
and Ibrahim Bey, should be sent here, 

If the first regiment of marines, and that of the town-militia of Broussa, 
which went with the Imperial fleet, have been sent to the Ottoman head- 
quarters and there delivered up, atter the evacuation of Syria by the Egyptian 
‘Troops, the intentions of the Sublime Porte would be already accomplished. 
If, on the contrary, they have been withdrawn into the interior of Egypt with 
the Egyptian Troops, they must now be sent back to Constantinople. 

_ In case, then, the two above-mentioned regiments should not have -been 
delivered up at the Ottoman head-quarters, the said Commissioner will devise 
the means of causing them to be sent here with all their officers, soldiers, and 
equipage. 

eS 


247 


Inclosure 2 in No. 172. 


Firman of Investiture sent to Mehemet Ali. 


(Traduction.) Te ie ae 
. CEST avec une vive satisfaction que j’ai été informé de la soumis- 
sion dont tu viens de faire preuve, ainsi que des sentimens de loyauté, 
de dévouement, et de fidélité que tu manifestes, tant envers ma personne 
Impériale, que pour les intéréts de mon Empire. Ces sentimens, joints 
au zéle et a la sagesse dont tu es doué, ainsi qu’aux connaissances et a 
Vexpérienee que tu as acquises par rapport aux affaires de Egypte dans 
le cours de ton administration, me sont garants que tu sauras mériter les 
marques, de faveur et de confiance que je veux te donner, c’est-A-dire que 
tu en reconnaitras tout le prix, et que tu t’appliqueras a transmettre ces 
sentimens 4 ta postérité. Dans cette conviction, je tai réintégré dans le 
Gouvernement de Egypte, compris dans telles et telles limites, et y ai 
ajouté le privilége de ’hérédité sous les conditions suivantes:— 

| Lorsque. par la suite le Gouvernement de Egypte deviendra vacant, 
il sera, conféré 4 celui parmi tes enfans males qui sera préféré et choisi 
par moi, et le méme principe sera suivi 4 l’égard de leurs enfans mAles. 
En cas d’extinction de ta descendance masculine, ma Sublime Porte 
conférera le dit Gouvernement 4 quelqu’un autre, et les males issus de la 
ligne féminine n’y auront aucune espéce de droit. 

Celui parmi tes enfans qui dorénavant sera monté au Gouvernement 
de Egypte, devra se rendre en personne a4 Constantinople pour en 
recevoir l’investiture. 
| Les Gouverneurs d’Egypte, bien que jouissant du privilége de 
Phérédité, seront assimilés aux autres Vizirs sous le rapport du grade et 
de la préséance, laquelle se réglera d’aprés lancienneté ; par conséquent, 
le cérémonial, les dénominations, et les titres dont on se sert 4 l’égard des 
autres Vizirs de ma Sublime Porte, seront également applicables aux 
Gouverneurs de l’Egypte, 

Les dispositions salutaires de mon Hatti Chérif de Gulhané, toutes 

les lois établies ou a établir par ma Sublime Porte, ainsi que tous les 
Traités conclus ou a conclure entre elle et les Cours amies, seront de 
méme exécutés en entier en Egypte. = 
’ Tous les impdts et revenus de Egypte seront percus en mon nom ; 
mais comme les habitans de VEgypte sont aussi des sujets de ma Sublime 
Porte, et que par conséquent il faut les garantir 4 jamais de toute espéce 
de cruauté et de vexation, les dimes, droits, et autres impdéts qui seront 
prélevés dans le dit Gouvernement, devront Pétre conformément aux 
principes en vigueur dans les autres provinces de mon Empire. 
) Quelque soit la somme a laquelle s’éléveront annuellement les droits 
de douanes, dimes, et autres impdéts et revenus quelconques du Gou- 
vernement de |’Egypte, un quart de ce revenu brut, c’est-a-dire, avant d’en 
faire aucune déduction de frais, sera pris et payé A ma Sublime Porte; les 
autres trois quarts seront laissés aux Gouverneurs de Egypte pour les 
frais de perception, pour les dépenses administratives et militaires, ainsi que 
pour leur propre usage, comme aussi en payement de vivres que lEgypte, 
d’aprés Vusage, fournit tous les ans, en nature, aux deux Villes Saintes. 
La qualité et le mode d’acquittement du tribut qui revient 4 ma Sublime 
Porte sera valable, tels qwils sont déterminés ici, pendant cing ans, a 
partir de la présente année, 1257. Ensuite ces points doivent étre réglés 
d’une maniére convenable, conformément a l'état futur de ’ Egypte et aux 
exigences dumoment. Ma Sublime Porte ayant l’obligation de connaitre 
exactement les revenus annuels de Egypte, ainsi que le mode dont on y 
prélevera les dimes et autres impéts, et cette connaissance ne pouvant 
étre obtenue qu’au moyen d’un contréle établi dans la dite province, on 
prendra A ce sujet les mesures que je ferai connaitre par une ordonnance 
Impériale. ; ; ] 

Ma Sublime Porte ayant résolu d’améliorer la monnaie de Empire 
qui sert de régulateur pour les transactions du peuple, et ce point devant 


i 


248 


étre régle d’une maniére qui rendra désormais impossible toute altération 
de taux et d’aloi, les monnaies d’or et d’argent qui se frappent en Egypte 
en mon nom et avec ma permission Impériale, devront, sous le rapport de 
taux et d’aloi, et de la forme, étre pareilles 4 celles de Constantinople. _ 

Dix-huit mille hommes de troupes étant suffisant, en tems de paix, 
pour la sécurité intérieure de Egypte, il ne sera pas permis de dépasser 
ce nombre. ‘Toutefois, comme les forces de terre et de mer de Egypte 
sont entretenues pour le service de ma Sublime Porte, celle-ci pourra en 
tems de guerre augmenter le dit nombre de telle maniére qu'elle le jugera 
a propos. , 

Comme il a été établi que les soldats qui seront dans les autres parties 
de l Empire, doivent, aprés cing années de service, étre remplacés par de 
nouvelles recrues, cette méme pratique devra ainsi étre suivie en Egypte. 
Par conséquent on prendra parmi les troupes Egyptiennes actuelles les 
soldats provenant du dernier recrutement; et sauf 4 fixer plus tard la durée 
de leur service, d’aprés la date de leur enrdlement, on en formera 20,000 
hommes, dont 18,000 seront employés, ainsi qu'il a été dit plus haut, 
pour le service intérieur de Egypte, et 2,000 pour le service d’ici. Et 
puisqu’un cinquiéme de ces 20,000 hommes devra étre renouvelé tous les 
ans, on levera annuellement sur la population effective de VEgypte 4,000 
recrues, en procédant avec la plus grande humanité, et en tirant impartiale- 
ment au sort ceux qui remplissent les conditions voulues par la loi. De 
ces 4,000 hommes, 3,600 seront retenus la, et 400 seront envoyés ici. Mais 
tant les uns que les autres seront renvoyés dans leurs foyers aprés cing 
années de service, et ceux dont le terme sera achevé, ne pourront plus 
étre enrdlés. 

Quoique les troupes qui serviront en Egypte pourront, 2 cause du 
climat, étre vétu d’une étoffe différente, cependant la coupe et la forme de 
leurs habits, ainsi que leurs Nichans et drapeaux, ne se distingueront en 
rien de ceux en usage dans les autres troupes de ma Sublime Porte. 

Les pavillons des batimens Egyptiens, comme aussi les uniformes et 
Nichan des officiers et des soldats de marine, seront pareils a ceux 
d’ici. . | 

Les officiers de terre et de mer, jusqu’au grade de Kol Aghassi (Major) 
inclusivement, seront nommés au choix des Gouverneurs de l’Egypte; les 
grades supérieurs ne pourront étre conférés que par moi, sur la proposition 
des dits Gouverneurs. 

I] ne sera pas permis aux Gouverneurs d’Egypte de construire dés- 
ormais des vaisseaux de guerre sans la permission expresse de ma Sublime 
Porte. 

Comme le privilége de Vhérédité dépend de chacun des présentes 
conditions, le non-accomplissement d’une d’entre elles entrainerait la révo- 
cation et ’annulation immédiate du dit privilége. 

Telle étant ma volonté Impériale, toi et tes enfans et descendans vous 
devrez apprécier avec reconnaissance cette insigne faveur Impériale, et 
exécuter scrupuleusement les présentes conditions. 

Vous aurez a veiller constamment au bien-¢tre et a la streté des 
habitans de l’Egypte, a les préserver de tout acte d’injustice et de vexa- 
tion, et A vous abstenir de tout procédé contraire au contenu du présent 
firman. ; 

C’est dans ce but que cet ordre Impérial, &c. 


(Translation.) 


21 Zilhadjé, 1259. 
February 13, 1841. 


IT is with lively satisfaction that I have received information of the submis- 
sion of which you have just given proof, as likewise of the feelings of loyalty, of 
devotion, and of fidelity which you show, as well towards my Imperial person 
as for the interests of my Empire. Those feelings, united to the zeal and 
wisdom with which you are endowed, as well as to the knowledge and experience 
which you have acquired with respect to the affairs of Egypt in the course of 
your administration, are guarantees to me that you will know how to deserve the 
marks of favour and confidence which I wish to bestow upon you, that is to say, 


249 


that you will acknowledge all the value thereof, and that you will study to 
transmit these feelings to your posterity. With this conviction, I have rein- 
stated you. in the Government of Egypt, comprehended within such and such 
limits, and have added thereto the privilege of the hereditary succession upon the 
following conditions :— 

When, in the course of time, the Government of Egypt shall become vacant, 
it shall be conferred upon him among your male children who shall be preferred 
and chosen by me, and the same principle shall be followed with regard to their 
male children. In case of your male descent becoming extinct, my Sublime 
Porte will confer the said Government upon some other person, and the male 
issue of the female line shall have no sort of right thereto. 

He among your children who shall hereafter be raised to the Government 
of Egypt, must repair in person to Constantinople to receive the investiture 
thereof. 

_ The Governors of Egypt, although enjoying the privilege of the hereditary 
succession, shall be assimilated to the other Viziers with respect to rank and 
to precedence, which shall be regulated according to seniority; consequently, the 
ceremonial, the denominations, and the titles, which are used with regard to the 
other Viziers of my Sublime Porte, shall be equally applicable to the Governors 
of Egypt. 

The salutary provisions of my Hatti Sheriff of Gulhané, all the laws esta- 
blished or to be established by my Sublime Porte, as well as all the treaties 
concluded, or to be concluded, between it and the friendly Courts, shall likewise 
be fully executed in Egypt. 

All the imposts and revenues of Egypt shall be levied in my name; but as 
the inhabitants of Egypt are also subjects of my Sublime Porte, and as, conse- 
quently, they must be for ever secured from every sort of cruelty and oppression, 
the tenths, duties, and other imposts, which. shall be levied within the said 
Government, shall be so in conformity with the principles in force in the other 
provinces of my Empire. 

Whatever may be the sum to which the customs, duties, tenths, and other 
imposts and revenues of whatever description of the Government of Egypt may 
annually amount, a quarter of that gross revenue, that is to say, before making 
any deduction therefrom for expences, shall be taken and paid to my Sublime 
Porte; the other three quarters shall be left to the Governors of Egypt for the 
expenses of collection, for those of administration and for the military expences 
as well as for their own use, as also in payment of the provisions which Egypt 
according to custom, furnishes every year in kind to the two Holy Cities. ‘Lhe 
nature and the form of payment of the tribute which reverts to my Sublime 
Porte, such as they are decided upon here, shall hold good for five years from the 
present year 1257. Afterwards these points must be regulated in a suitable man- 
ner, according to the future state of Egypt and to the exigencies of the moment. 
My Sublime Porte being obliged to know exactly the annual revenues of Egypt, as 
well as the manner in which the tithes and other imposts will be levied there, 
and this knowledge being only to be acquired by means of a control established 
in the said province, measures will be adopted upon this subject which I shall 
make known by an Imperial Ordinance. 

My Sublime Porte being resolved to improve the coin of the Empire which 
serves to regulate the transactions of the people) and it being necessary. 
that this point should be settled in a manner which will render any alteration of 
value or standard henceforth impossible, the gold and silver coms which are 
struck in Egypt in my name and with my Imperial permission, shall, with regard 
to value, and standard, and form, be similar to those of Constantinople. _ 

Eighteen thousand men being sufficient in time of peace for the internal 
security of Egypt, it will not be permitted that that number should be exceeded. 
However, as the land and sea forces of Egypt are maintained for the service of 
my Sublime Porte, the latter shall have the power in time of war of increasing 
that number in such manner as it may think fit. 

As it has been settled that the soldiers who shall be in other parts of the 
Empire must, after five years’ service, be replaced by new recruits, this same 
practice must also be followed in Egypt. Consequently, from among the present 
Egyptian troops, the soldiers arising from the last recruiting shall be selected ; 
and with the reservation that the duration of their service shall be hereafter fixed 
according to the date of their enlistment : on shall be formed thereof 20,000 men, 


250 


of whom 18,000 shall be employed, as above stated, for the internal service of 
Egypt, and 2,000 for service here. And since a fifth of these 20,000 men must 
be renewed every year, 4,000 recruits shall be levied from the effective population 
of Egypt, acting with the greatest humanity, and impartially drawing lots for 
those who answer to the conditions prescribed by the law. Of these 4,000 men, 
3,600 shall be kept there, and 400 shall be sent here. But one as well as the 
other shall be sent back to their homes after five years’ service, and those whose 
term shall have expired cannot again be enlisted. 

Although the troops which may serve in Egypt shall be allowed, on account 
of the climate, to be clothed with a different stuff, yet the cut and form of their 
clothes, as well as their nichans and flags, shall in no wise be distinguished from 
those in use among other troops of my Sublime Porte. _ 

The flags of the Egyptian vessels, as well as the uniforms and nichan of the 
officers and men of the navy, shall be similar to those used here. ; 

The officers of the land and sea forces up to the rank of Kol-Aghassi (major ) 
inclusively, shall be appointed according to the choice of the Governors of 
Egypt; the superior ranks can only be conferred by me on the recommendation 
of the said Governors. 

The Governors of Egypt shall not be permitted henceforth to build vessels 
of war without the express permission of my Sublime Porte. 

As the privilege of the hereditary succession depends upon each of the 
present conditions, the non-fulfilment of one of them would cause the immediate 
revocation and annulment of the said privilege. 

This being my Imperial will, you, and your children, and descendants, will 
appreciate with gratitude this signal Imperial favour, and scrupulously execute 
the present conditions. 

You will have constantly to watch over the welfare and safety of the inha- 
bitants of Egypt, to preserve them from any act of injustice and oppression, and 
to abstain from any proceeding contrary to the contents of the present firman. 

It is with this object that this Imperial order, &c. 


Inclosure 3 in No. 172. 


Imperial Firman addressed to Mehemet Ali, conferring upon him the 
Government of Nubia, Darfour, Kordufan, and Sennaar, and enjoin- 
ing him to abolish the Negro-hunts, &c. 


(Traduction.) Wiese Bae 

A MON Vizir Méhémet Ali Pacha, Gouverneur d’Egypte, a qui je 
confie 4 présent l’administration des provinces de Nubie, Darfour, Cor- 
dufan, et Senaar. 

O toi, mon susdit Vizir! comme ainsi qu’il a été dit dans une autre 
ordonnance Impériale, j’ai jugé 4 propos de te réintégrer dans le Gou- 
vernement de l’Egypte, comprise dans ses limites connues, et d’y ajouter 
Phérédité sous certaines conditions, j’ai pris aussi la gracieuse réso- 
lution de t’accorder sans l’hérédité le Gouvernement de Nubie, Darfour, 
Cordufan, et Senaar, avec toutes leurs dépendances, c’est-a-dire, avec toutes 
leurs annexes situées en-dehors de Egypte, et j’ai rendu a ce sujet 
une ordonnance Impériale. 

Tu t’appliqueras done par suite de ton habilité et de ta sagesse 
a administrer et 4 faire prospérer ces pays conformément a mes intentions 
pleines de justice, et assurer le repos et le bien-étre de leurs habitans. 
Tu soumettras, aussi, 4 ma Sublime Porte une liste exacte des revenus 
annuels des dites provinces. 

Les incursions que les troupes ont coutume de faire de tems en tems 
dans les villages des pays ci-dessus nommés, et par suite desquels les 
individus jeunes et vigoureux des deux sexes sont fait captifs et restent 
entre les mains des soldats en payement de leur solde, entrainent, néces- 
sairement, la ruine et le dépeuplement de ces contrées, et sont con- 
traires 4 notre sainte loi et aux maximes de la justice. 

Comme donc cet usage, ainsi que celui de réduire quelques uns des 


251 


dits captifs 4 la condition d’eunuques, est sous tous les rapports opposé 
a ma volonté Impériale, et qu’en général de pareils actes de cruauté 
répugnent aux principes de justice et d’humanité que j’ai hautement 
proclamés dés mon avénement au tréne: . 

Tu aviseras avec la plus grande sollicitude aux moyens de les dé- 
fendre sévérement, et de les abolir d’une maniére définitive. 

_ Tous les officiers, soldats et autres employés qui se trouvent en 
Egypte, 2 l'exception de certains individus qui s’y sont rendus avec 
ma flotte, ayant été gracieusement pardonnés par moi, tu auras a leur 
annoncer 4 tous cette heureuse nouvelle. 

D’aprés ce qui est dit dans l’autre ordonnance Impériale mentionnée 
ci-dessus, les officiers employés auprés de toi, et qu’il s’agira de nommer 
a un grade supérieur a celui de Kol Aghassi (Major), ne pourront étre 
nommés qu’aprés qu’il en aura été référé a ma Sublime Porte. 

Toutefois ceux qui se trouvent actuellement au service, seront 
confirmés dans leur grade, et tu auras 4 soumettre 4 ma Sublime Porte 
une liste de ces officiers, pour que Von puisse publier et expédier leur 
firman de confirmation. th? 

Ma volonté Impériale étant que tous ces divers points soient exé- 
cutés, tu devras t’empresser de t’y conformer exactement, et c’est a cette 


fin que, &c. &c. 


(Translation.) 


21 Zithadgé, 1256. 
February 13, 1841. 


TO my Vizier Mehemet Ali Pasha, Governor of Egypt, to whom I now 
confide the administration of the provinces of Nubia, Darfour, Cordufan, and 
Sennaar. 

O my above-mentioned Vizier! since, as has been said in another Imperial 
Ordinance, I have thought fit to reinstate you in the government of Egypt, 
comprehended within its known limits, and to add thereto the hereditary succes- 
sion upon certain conditions, I have also taken the gracious resolution of granting 
to you, without the hereditary succession, the government of Nubia, Darfour, 
Cordufan, and Sennaar, with all their dependencies, that is to say, with all the 
territories annexed to them situated out of Egypt, and I have issued an Imperial 
Ordinance upon this subject. 

You will then study, by means of your intelligence and of your wisdom, to 
govern those countries and to make them prosper in conformity with my just 
intentions, and to insure the tranquillity and the welfare of their inhabitants. 
You will, likewise, submit to my Sublime Porte an exact list of the annual 
revenues of the said provinces. 

The incursions which the troops are accustomed to make from time to time 
into the villages of the above-named countries, and in consequence of which 
young and vigorous individuals of both sexes are made prisoners and remain in 
the hands of the soldiers in discharge of their pay, lead, necessarily, to the ruin 
and depopulation of those countries, and are contrary to our holy law and to the 
rules of justice. 

As, then, this custom, as well as that of reducing some of the said captives 
to the condition of eunuchs, is in all respects contrary to my Imperial will, and 
as in general such acts of cruelty are repugnant to the principles of justice and 
humanity which I have loudly proclaimed since my accession to the throne: 

You will devise with the greatest care the means of rigidly prohibiting 
them and of abolishing them in a definitive manner. 

All the officers, soldiers, and other public servants who are in Egypt, with 
the exception of certain individuals who repaired thither with my fleet, having 
been graciously pardoned by me, you will have to announce this happy itelli- 
gence to all. 

According to what is said in the other Imperial Ordmance above-men- 
tioned, the officers employed about you, and whom it may be a question of 
appointing to a rank superior to that of Kol Aghassi (Major), cannot be ap- 
pointed until a reference shall have been made to my Sublime Porte. 

However those who are actually in service shall be confirmed in their rank; 


2K 2 


252 


and you will have to submit to my Sublime Porte a list of these officers, in order 
that their firman of confirmation may be published and sent to them. : 

It being my Imperial will that all these several points should be executed, 
you will take pains to act exactly in conformity therewith, and it is to this end 
that, &c., &c. 


Inclosure 4 in No. 172. 


The Grand Vizier to Mehemet Ali, on his nomination to the hereditary Government 
of Egypt. 
(Traduction.) TSFeTe en: 

L’EMPRESSEMENT de votre Excellence 4 remplir les devoirs de 
Vobéissance, en prouvant, par des faits promptement exécutés, la sincérité 
de la soumission que vous aviez offerte, a été fort agréable 4 Sa Hautesse, 
qui a daigné en conséquence vous réintégrer dans le Gouvernement de 
Egypte et vous en accorder l’hérédité. 

J’envoie 4 votre Excellence par Said Muhib Effendi un firman revétu 
dun Hatti Chérif, et contenant certaines conditions attachées 4 Vhéré- 
dité, ainsi que le Nichan, que Sa Hautesse a bien voulu vous conférer, 
comme étant celui qui est affecté au rang de Vizir. Sa Hautesse est con- 
vaincu, qu’agissant avec cette prudence et cette haute sagesse qui vous 
distinguent, vous ne vous écarterez jamais de la voie de la droiture, de 
Vobéissance et de dévouement a votre Souverain. , 

Sa Hautesse a toute confiance en votre Excellence, et si l’on a établi 
des conditions dans le firman susdit, ce n’est pas qu’on ait le moindre 
soupgon sur votre compte. Mais indépendamment de la nécessité absolue 
que des conditions essentielles soient rattachées 4 une aussi grande conces- 
sion que celle du privilége de l’hérédité, Sa Hautesse avoulu et a jugé a 
propos d’insérer ces conditions dans le firman, parcequ’elle les considére 
non seulement comme un moyen de prévenir toute espéce de différends qui, 
vu les difficultés de prévoir l’avenir et 4 cause de vicissitude humaine, 
pourraient surgir par la suite, mais aussi comme une mesure de précau- 
tion tendant 4 assurer pour toujours le repos et la tranquillité des 
habitans de PEgypte. 

Désormais la Sublime Porte aura tout aussi peu lieu de concevoir des 
soupcons que votre Excellence en aura de parler de sa stireté personnelle 
et de l’avenir de sa famille. 

Enfin, il n’y a plus entre nous aucun motif de contestation, c’est-a- 
dire les démélés qui ont subsistés depuis, ont cessé, grace a Dieu; et il n’y 
a pas de doute que votre Excellence ne remplisse avec empressement le 
devoir de témoigner sa reconnaissance pour les bienfaits et les faveurs 
dont elle a été ainsi l’objet de la part de Sa Hautesse. 

Dorénavant nous serons, s'il plait 4 Dieu, unis de cceur et d’Ame, et 
n’ayant entre nous aucun sujet de division, nous emploierons, sous les 
auspices de Sa Hautesse, nos communs efforts 4 servir notre religion, notre 
Gouvernement, notre patrie, et notre nation: ce qui me cause la plus 


grande satisfaction 4 moi, votre sincére ami, ainsi qu’d tous les Ministres 
de la Sublime Porte, &c., &c. 


(Translation.) 


21 Zilhadjé, 1256 


February 13, 1841° 
THE readiness of your Excellency to fulfil the duties of obedience, by 
proving, by acts promptly executed, the sincerity of the submission which you 
have offered, has been very agreeable to His Highness, who has deigned in con- 
sequence to reinstate you in the government of Egypt, and to grant to you the 
hereditary succession thereto. 
I send to your Excellency by Said Muhib Effendi a firman accompanied by a 
Hatti Sheriff, and containing certain conditions attached to the hereditary succes- 


253 


sion, as well as the Nishan, which His Highness has been pleased to confer upon 
you as being that which is appropriated to the rank of Vizier. His Highness is 
convinced that, acting with that prudence and that exalted wisdom which dis- 
tinguish you, you will never wander from the path of uprightness, of obedience, 
and of devotion to your sovereign. 

His Highness has full confidence in your Excellency, and if conditions have 
been laid down in the above-mentioned firman, it is not because there is any 
suspicion with respect to you. But, independently of the absolute necessity of 
attaching essential conditions to so great a concession as that of the privilege 
of the hereditary succession, His Highness wished and thought fit to insert 
those conditions in the firman, because he considers them not only asa means of 
preventing every sort of difference which, considering the difficulty of seeing 
into futurity and on account of the vicissitudes in human affairs, might arise in 
the course of time, but also as a measure of precaution tending to secure for ever 
the repose and tranquillity of the inhabitants of Egypt. 

Hereafter the Sublime Porte will have quite as little reason to entertain sus- 
picions as your Excellency will have to speak of your personal safety and of the 
prospects of your family. 

In short, there is no longer any cause of dispute between us, that is to say, 
the quarrels which have existed have ceased, thanks to God; and there is no 
doubt that your Excellency will zealously fulfil the duty of testifying your gra- 
titude for the benefits and favours of His Highness of which you have thus been 
the object. 

Henceforth we shall, please God, be united heart and soul, and, not having 
any subject of discord between us, we shall, under the auspices of His Highness, 
employ our joint efforts to serve our religion, our government, our country, and 
our nation; which causes the greatest satisfaction to me, your sincere friend, as 
well as to all the Ministers of the Sublime Porte, &c., &c. 


Inclosure 5 in No. 172. 
Official Note from the Sublime Porte to the Imperial and Royal Internuncio. 


. 21 Zilhadjé, 1256. 
(Traduction.) “Tg Fewrier, T6iT. 


NOUS communiquons a votre Excellence ci-joint, une copie du firman 
Impérial qui, en raison des faits par lesquels Méhémet Ali Pacha a 
prouvé sa soumission, et conformément 4 la promesse de Sa Hautesse 
le Sultan, réintégre le dit Pacha dans le Gouvernement de lEgypte, 
et lui en accorde Vhérédité,—firman qui contient aussi les conditions 
que Sa Hautesse a jugé a propos d’établir a ce sujet. 

Nous espérons fort et considérons comme trés-probable que Méhémet 
Ali Pacha s’empressera d’accepter et d’exécuter en entier les dites condi- 
tions. Cependant si, contre toute attente, il refusait de le faire, ces _con- 
ditions équitables ne seraient pas susceptibles d’étre changées ou modifiées, 
vu qu’une pareille modification porterait atteinte aux droits de souve- 
raineté, 3 V’honneur de la Sublime Porte, ainsi qu’a la dignité des 
Puissances Alliées. En outre, la Sublime Porte, ainsi qu il est connu 
& votre Excellence, a agi, depuis le commencement de la Question 
Egyptienne, suivant Vavis et les conseils des Quatre Augustes Cours, ses 
Amies et Alliées. Par conséquent le Gouvernement de Sa Hautesse le 
Sultan prie formellement les dites Cours de vouloir bien, dans Vhypothése 
susmentionnée, lui accorder de nouveau l’assistance dont il aura besoin. 

En attendant, puisque la question d’Egypte doit étre considérée 
comme entiérement terminée, et qu’il n’existe plus de ce cdté-1a ni blocus, 
ni aucune espéce d’embarras, il sera convenable que les Consuls des 
Quatre Cours Alliées qui ont été rappelés d’Alexandrie, so1ent renvoyes a 
leurs postes. ‘ 

C’est pour communiquer tout ceci a votre Excellence que nous lui 
remettons la présente Note Officielle, pareille 4 celles qui ont été adressées 
4 MM. les Représentans de la Grande Bretagne, de Prusse, et de Russie. 

Nous renouvelons & votre Excellence lassurance de notre haute 
et affectueuse considération. 


254 


P.S.—Nous joignons a la présente une copie d’un autre firman 
Impérial qui confére & Méhémet Ali, sans hérédité, Vadministration 
de certaines provinces situées en-dehors de l’Egypte, et qui renferme 
aussi quelques autres résolutions Souveraines. 


(Translation.) 


21 Zilhadgé, 1256. 
February 13, 1841. 


WE communicate to your Excellency herewith a copy of the Imperial firman 
which, on account of the actions by which Mehemet Ali Pasha has proved his 
submission, and in conformity with the promise of His Highness the Sultan, rein- 
states the said Pasha in the Government of Egypt, and grants to him the here- 
ditary succession thereto,—-which firman also contains the conditions which His 
Highness has thought fit to lay down upon this subject. 

We strongly hope and consider as very probable, that Mehemet Ali Pasha 
will eagerly accept and fully execute the said conditions. However if, contrary 
to all expectation, he should refuse to do so, those just conditions would not 
be suscep tble of alteration or modification, considering that such modification 
would he prejudicial to the rights of Sovereignty, to the honour of the Sublime 
Porte, as well as to the dignity of the Allied Powers. Moreover, the Sublime 
Porte, as your Excellency knows, has acted, from the commencement of the 
Egyptian Question, according to the opinion and advice of the Four August 
Courts, its friends and Allies. Consequently, the Government of His Highness 
the Sultan formally requests the said Courts to have the goodness, in the above- 
mentioned contingency, again to afford him the assistance of which he will be 
in need. 

In the meanwhile, since the Question of Egypt must be considered as 
entirely terminated, and as there no longer exists in that quarter either a 
blockade, or any sort of difficulty, it will be expedient that the Consuls of the 
Four Allied Courts who were recalled from Alexandria, should be sent back to 
their posts. 

It is for the purpose of communicating all this to your Excellency that we 
send to you this official Note, similar to those which have been addressed to the 
Representatives of Great Britain, Prussia, and Russia. 

We renew to your Excellency the assurance of our high and affectionate 
consideration. 


P.S.—We herewith inclose a copy of another Imperial firman which con- 
fers upon Mehemet Ali, without the hereditary right, the administration of 


certain provinces situated out of Egypt, and which also contains some other 
sovereign resolutions. 


Inclosure 6 in No. 172. 


Circular addressed by the Sublime Porte to the Ambassador of France, 
and the other Representatives, to announce to them the final settlement 
of the Egyptian Question. 


(Traduction.) 


SON Excellence Méhémet Ali Pacha ayant effectué la soumission 
qwil avait annoncée, la question d’Egypte se trouve par 1A terminée, et 
il n’existe plus, 4 l’égard de la dite Province, ni blocus, ni aucun autre 
espéce d’embarras ou d’entraves commerciales. 

C’est pour porter officiellement ce fait 4 la connaissance de toutes 
les Cours étrangéres, Amies de la Sublime Porte, que nous avons adressé 
une Note Officielle 4 chacun de MM. les autres Représentans, de méme 
que nous remettons la présente 4 son Excellence M. Ambassadeur de 


France, en lui renouvelant. 4 cette occasion assurance de notre haute 
et affectueuse considération. ’ 


255 


(Translation. ) 


HIS Excellency Mehemet Ali Pasha having carried into effect the sub- 
mission which he had announced, the Question of Egypt is thereby terminated 
and there no longer exists, with regard to that proviuce either a blockade, or 
any other sort of difficulty or of impediment to commerce. 

It is for the purpose of officially communicating this fact to all the Foreign 
Courts, friends of the Sublime Porte, that we have addressed an Official Note to 
each of the other Representatives, in the same manner as we send this to his 
Excellency the Ambassador of France, renewing to him on this occasion the 
assurance of our high and affectionate consideration. 


Inclosure 7 in No. 172. 


Imperial Firman addressed to Mehemet Ali, relative to the Arrears of 
Tribute. 


(Traduction.) ed 

A MON Vizir Méhémet Ali Pacha, Gouverneur d’Egypte. 

Je t’envoie, par Said Muhib Effendi, un des hauts fonctionnaires 
de ma Sublime Porte, qui se rend 4 Alexandrie, en mission extraordinaire, 
les listes des tributs et arrérages qui se sont accumulés tant pour Egypte, 
que je viens de te conférer gracieusement a titre héréditaire, que pour la 
Syrie et Pile de Candie, qui ne se trouvent placés sous ton adminis- 
tration. 

Comme tes fonctions t’imposent le devoir de verser intégralement 
et sans délai, dans mon trésor Impérial, les dites sommes arriérées, je 
t’adresse le présent firman pour que tu effectues en entier les payemens en 
question, et pour que tu fournisses par la une nouvelle preuve de ton 
obéissance et de ta fidélité. 


(Translation.) 


gl Zilhadjé, 1256. 
February 13, 184 ° 


To my Vizier Mehemet Ali Pasha, Governor of Egypt, 7 By 

I SEND to you, by Said Muhib Effendi, one of the high functionaries of my 
Sublime Porte, who is going to Alexandria upon an extraordinary mission, the 
lists of the tribute and arrears which have accumulated for Egypt, which I have 
graciously conferred upon you with the hereditary right, as well as for Syria and 
the Island of Candia, which are not under your administration. 

As your functions impose upon you the duty of paying wholly and without 
delay, into my Imperial. treasury, the said sums in arrear, I address this firman to 
you in order that you may make the payments in question in full, and in order 
that you may thereby afford a fresh proof of your obedience and of your 
fidelity. 


No. 173. 
R. More O’Ferrall, Esq. to Lord Leveson. 


My Lord, : Admiralty, M arch 12, 1841 


I AM commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to 
send you herewith, for the information of Viscount Palmerston, copies of 
two letters from Admiral the Honourable Sir Robert Stopford, dated the 
28th of February and Ist of March last, with their inclosures, relative to 
the evacuation of Syria by the Egyptian army. 

I have, &c., 


(Signed) R. MORE O’FERRALL. 


—— 


256 


Inclosure 1 in Ne. 173. 
+ Admiral Stopford to R. More O’ Ferrall, Esq. 


<¢ Princess Charlotte,’’ at Malta, 
Sir, February 28, 1841. 7 


I HAVE great satisfaction in communicating to you for their Lord- 
ships’ information, the gratifying announcement of the entire evacuation 
of Syria by the Egyptian army, which event took place on the 18th 
instant, when Ibrahim Pasha proceeded by sea with the sick and wounded, 
whilst the remainder of his army marched by land by El-Arish, as 
detailed by Captain Stewart and Colonel Bridgeman’s letters, copies of 
which I have now the honour to inclose. 

In thus concluding so happily and successfully an enterprise of no 
common description, and at one time of small promise from its apparently 
inadequate means and complex elements, as well as the imposing attitude 
of the Egyptian force then in possession of the whole country, with all 
its fortresses and strongholds; it is a matter of no small gratification to 
me, under so momentous a responsibility as Commander-in-Chief of the 
whole expedition, that I was able to accomplish in so brief a period and 
with so inconsiderable a waste of human life on the part of the Allies, 
objects of such paramount importance to the peace of Europe. In return 
for which I am bound to acknowledge with gratitude their Lordships’ 
most liberal rewards to the officers who had opportunities of distinguish- 
ing themselves in the fulfilment of my orders. 

From the various documents herewith transmitted, and the more volu- 
minous correspondence now forwarded by the “ Liverpool” packet, it will 
be observed by their Lordships, that Captain Stewart’s presence and 
co-operation in the final arrangements at Jaffa and Gaza were of most, 
essential service, as affording consistency to divided councils, and a firm 
and judicious support in honourable fulfilment, under delicate and con- 
flicting circumstances, of the conditions under which the retreat of Ibrahim 
Pasha and his army, which turned out to be more formidable than was 
supposed, was finally effected. 

Captain Stewart speaks most favourably of the conduct of the 
captains and commanders of the steamers employed upon that dangerous 
coast, and itis equally satisfactory to me. The only painful attendant on 
this warfare has been the more or less prevalence of fever and dysentery at 
Djounie and Acre, from which many have gradually recovered, but to many 
it has been fatal. [am however happy to be enabled to inform their Lord- 
ships, that in consequence of some cases of plague at Acre and Sidon all 
the marines are now embarked, and most probably now with the squadron 
at Marmorice, or on their way to Malta. 

T have, &c., 
(Signed) _ ROBERT STOPFORD, 
Admiral. 


Sub-Inclosure | in Inclosure 1 in No. 173. 
Captain Houston Stewart to Admiral Stopford. 


Her Majesty's Ship “‘ Benbow,” St. George’s Bay, 
Sir, Beyrout, February 20, 1841. 

_[ HAVE the honour to announce to you the entire evacuation of 
Syria by the Egyptian army; Ibrahim Pasha, who remained to the last, 
having himself embarked on board the Egyptian steamer on Thursday the 
18thinstant. This would have been effected last week had not the weather 
been such for several days as to render communication with the shipping 
impracticable. His retreat has been conducted with much less loss of 
life than had been anticipated. He takes about 30,000 men from Gaza 


257 


back into Egypt by land and sea, exclusive of the column which marched 
by the Desert under the command of Solyman Pasha, with the women, 
guns, &c., said to amount to about 4,000 men. iad. 

I inclose you copies of the directions I issued before leaving Jaffa in 
the ‘“‘ Vesuvius” on the 16th instant, to the different ships on the coast, by 
which you will see that the remainder of the marines and sappers have 
been taken from Acre by the “ Hazard,” and the whole of the marine 
artillery at Sidon are at this moment embarking on board the “ Magi- 
cienne” for passage to Marmorice, the “Hecate” having communicated 
with her in passing Sidon this morning. 

We brought up in the “ Vesuvius” all the marine detachment from 
Jaffa, which (with those from Acre per ‘‘ Hazard”) are on board the 
*“Benbow,” and Lieutenant-Colonel Colquhoun’s party of guns and 
artillerymen, which have been landed at Beyrout. The “ Hecate” has 
brought up Lieutenant-Colonel Higgins’s guns and artillerymen, together 
with the commissariat and head-quarters of the British, which, as well as 
that of the Turkish army, is now established at Beyrout. 

In concluding the anxious duties which you have done me the honour 
toentrust to me, I gladly avail myself of the privilege, as senior officer, to 
report to you the satisfaction which I have derived from the exertions of 
every ship serving’ under my orders throughout the dead of winter on an 
exposed and most dangerous coast; and to the captains of the “ Dido,” 
“ Magicienne,” ‘Hazard, ‘‘ Vesuvius,” and “ Hecate,’ my thanks are 
justly due for their unremitting vigilance and co-operation. 

To Captain Thomas Henderson of the ‘ Vesuvius” has fallen the 
heaviest share of the work, and to no better workman could it have been 

iven. 
; You are aware, Sir, of his generous attempt to succour the “ Zebra”’ 
in the gale of the 2nd of December, since which he has repeatedly effected 
personal communication with the army of Jaffa and Gaza at times when 
many would have deemed it impossible. 

Nor can I refrain from stating to you that the efficient order and 
strict discipline maintained by Commander Stopford with the crew of the 
stranded “ Zebra” entitle him to your commendation. 

My former letters informed you of the pleasing confidence which 
subsisted between the late Brigadier-General Michell and myself. In his 
successor, Colonel Bridgeman, I have found precisely the same anxious 
wish that we should act cordially together, accompanied by the same 
invariable personal kindness and attention. 

I send the “‘ Vesuvius” direct to you with the despatches from the 
different Authorities, together with a letter from Colonel Bridgeman, 
requesting me so to do, and I shall take duplicates from him to Sir John 
Ommaney at Marmorice, to which place it is my intention to proceed 
with “Magicienne” and “Hazard” as soon as possible, leaving the 
‘“‘ Hecate” here at the disposal of Colonel Bridgeman. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) HOUSTON STEWART, 
Captain and Semor Officer on the Coast of Syria. 


P.S.—Permit me to add that Lieutenant Loring of the “ Carysfort,” 
who was sent up by Commodore Sir Charles Napier to accompany 
Mehemet Ali’s Envoy and to see Ibrahim Pasha out of Syria, endured 
much personal fatigue in endeavouring to find Ibrahim, and has most 
carefully superintended the embarkation, remaining at Gaza for that 


purpose. 


2 L 


258 


Sub-Inclosure 2 in Inclosure 1 in No. 173. 


Colonel Bridgeman to Admiral Stopford. 


British Head Quarters, Jaffa, 
Sir, February 19, 1841. 


IN my last despatch, I informed your Excellency that the 
Egyptian forces at Gaza had commenced their march towards Egypt, 
and I have now the satisfaction of reporting to you their final evacuation 
of Syria. The inclosed statement of Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson, who 
has superintended this evacuation from its commencement, will inform 
your Excellency of the numbers which have retired by land as well as 
by sea. 

4 On the 5th instant I proceeded to Gaza, returning here on the 10th, 
and personally assured myself, in my interviews with Ibrahim Pasha, that 
he was no less desirous to hasten than we were to induce his departure ; 
indeed, he was then only awaiting the arrival of transports and the 
return of two steamers to embark the remainder of his troops, and to 
take also his own passage; 1,000 Regular Cavalry and some Irregular 
Horse were the only mounted force remaining, and these would proceed 
by land. As Captain Stewart is about to return to Marmorice, and I 
believe thence eventually to Malta, I will not trespass upon your Excel- 
lency’s time by entering into more detailed statements; I would only 
observe, that the Convention has been carried on, since I last had the 
honour of writing to you, with perfect good faith on both sides, and 
that Turkish and Egyptian Authorities have evinced all possible 
reliance upon British mediation, and acquiesced in all our proposals and 
arrangements. 

I feel much bound to the Seraskier for his courtesy and attention to 
our suggestions. 

The evacuation of the country by the Egyptians being thus happily 
in progress, | considered that I might with prudence and safety acquiesce 
in Captain Stewart’s proposition for the embarkation of the battalion of 
the Royal Marines. 

The portion of that force stationed at Acre, with the exception of 
Lieutenant-Colonel Mc Callum, one other officer, and a small detachment 
as a guard over the stores, embarked in the “ Vesuvius,” on the 3rd 
instant; and the same vessel removed, on the 16th instant, the detach- 
ment which has been stationed at this place; whilst Her Majesty’s ship 
“Hazard,” calling at Acre, will convey from thence to Marmorice Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Mc Callum, the officer and party remaining there. 

Captain Stewart has also so especially urged me to consent to the 
withdrawal of the Royal Marine Artillery from Sidon, that I have assented 
to their embarkation in Her Majesty’s ship “ Magicienne,” and I beg to 
refer your Excellency to our correspondence on the subject. 

{t is impossible for me to express how really grateful I am for the 
able advice, assistance, and support which Captain Stewart has afforded 
me, and | could not but sincerely regret his departure; but he has, I fear, 
experienced much personal discomfort whilst living at our head-quarters, 
and it is selfish, therefore, in me to do so. 

As the Seraskier and head-quarters of the Turkish army are 
returning to Beyrout, it is my intention to remove there also, and the 
whole of the Artillery have been provided with passages in the “ Vesu- 
vius” and “ Hecate” war-steamers. The appearance of plague at this 
place amongst some Turkish soldiers is an additional reason for this 
movement. 

I do not enter upon the question of the release of the Syrians who 
may have been serving with Ibrahim Pasha’s army, as Captain Stewart 
will, of course, communicate the correspondence that has taken place on 
that subject with Commodore Sir Charles Napier. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) E. H. BRIDGEMAN, 
Colonel Commanding British Forces in Syria. 


LL ES 


259 


Inclosure 2 in No. 173. 
Admiral Stopford to R. More O’Ferrail, Esq. 


: ** Princess Charlotte,’ Malta, 
Sir, March 1, 1841. 

I BEG to transmit herewith copies of despatches which I have just 
received from Commodore Sir Charles Napier, at Alexandria, on the sub- 
ject of the evacuation of Syria, with the extract of the Hatti Sheriff and 
correspondence with Boghos Bey. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) ROBERT STOPFORD, 
Admural. 


Sub-Inclosure 1 in Inclosure 2 in No. 173. 


Commodore Napier to Admiral Stopford. 


, Her Majesty’s Steamer “ Stromboli,” 
Sir, Alexandria, February 24, 1841. 

I HAVE the honour to inform you that Lieutenant Loring joined 
me this morning from Gaza*. I inclose his report, by which you will 
observe that the whole of the Egyptian army have left Syria. Ibrahim 
Pasha landed at Damietta on the 19th, and proceeded to Cairo. 

Lieutenant Loring has had a very fatiguing and dangerous duty to 
perform, and met with little or no assistance from the inhabitants of the 
country through which he passed. 

The menacing position of the Turkish army obliged Ibrahim Pasha 
to go round the Dead Sea. 

I have great. reason to be satisfied with the whole of Lieutenant 
Loring’s proceedings, and I beg to recommend him to their Lordships’ 
consideration. 

The Emirs and Sheiks are arrived at Cairo, and the Pasha has 
promised to send them to Syria on their arrival here. 

A Turkish Commissioner arrived there on the 20th with the firman 
from the Porte, a translation of which I beg to inclose. 

The Pasha has accepted the 2nd, 4th, and 5th Articles, and the part 
of the 6th which regards the construction of ships of war; he begs the 
Sublime Porte to modify the Article 3rd, as being oppressive to Egypt; 
Article Ist he considers to be inadmissible, as it will bring discord into 
his family and civil war at his death; he also objects to the part of 
Article 6th which relates to the appointment of officers, as tending to 
disorganize the army, and bring his authority into contempt: hitherto all 
officers have been appointed by him with the exception of Generals of 
Divisions, and a deviation from that system would endanger the discipline 
of the army. 3 

His objections appeared to me so well founded, that J made no 
attempt to refute them. 

A good many Syrians have come into Egypt with the army; I have 
demanded their immediate release, but the Pasha at present is so irritated 
that he would not comply till he heard from Constantinople; this will, 
however, blow over in a few days. 

The Turkish Commissioner has sent to Constantinople for fresh 
instructions, and I do trust they will be more reasonable. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER, 


Commodore. 


* Sub-Inclosure in No. 177. 
Bots 2 


260 


Sub-Inclosure 2 in Inclosure 2 in No. 173. 
Commodore Napier to Boghos Bey. 


Her Majesty’s Steamer ‘* Stromboli,” 
Alexandria, February 23, 1841. 


LIEUTENANT LORING, whom i charged with seeing the evacu- 
ation of Syria carried into effect, informs me, that the whole of the 
Syrian troops, instead of being left at Gaza as agreed upon between us, 
have retired into Egypt. ay 1 

I have to request that the Syrians may be sent forthwith into Syria. 

Your Excellency must be aware, if any impediment is thrown in the 
way, it will give the Sultan as well as the British Government a just 
cause of complaint, as under the Convention it was never contemplated 
that the Syrians should retire with the Egyptian Army. It is true that, 
in order to avoid a collision, I authorized the officer in Syria, if necessary, 
to permit the Syrians to retire with the Egyptians, with the under- 
standing, that the evacuation being completed, they should be sent to 
their homes. 

It now becomes a duty for your Excellency to carry this into execu- 
tion without waiting for the final settlement of the question relative to 
the hereditary succession, and I have to request your Excellency will give 
me a reply that I may forward it to the British Government by the 
*“‘ Liverpool,” which sails to-morrow at noon. 

I have, &c., $ 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER, 


Commodore. 


Sir 


? 


Sub-Inclosure 3 in Inclosure 2 in No. 173. 
Boghos Bey to Commodore Napier. 


Monsieur le Commodore, Alexandrie, le 24 Février, 1841. 


JE m’empresse d’accuser la réception de votre lettre du 23 courant, 
recue hier dans la nuit, concernant les soldats Syriens qui de Gaza ont 
poursuivi leur route avec les Egyptiens vers le Caire, lesquels vous 
m’écrivez devoir étre renvoyés chez eux aprés leur arrivée. 

Son Altesse le Viceroi vous a parlé dans son entretien de hier soir, 
que d’aprés l intelligence eu avec Mazloum Bey, cela n’aurait pas été de 
rigueur ; néanmoins je puis vous assurer, M. le Commodore, que ces soldats 
ne tarderont pas a étre renvoyés; j’en prends l’engagement, connaissant 
les sentimens élevés de Son Altesse le Viceroi. 

Recevez, &c., 


(Signé) BOGHOS JOUSSOUF. 


(Translation.) 


M. le Commodore, Alexandria, February 24,1841. 
_ _LHASTEN to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 23rd 
instant, received last night, concerning the Syrian soldiers who from Gaza 
have continued their route with the Egyptians towards Cairo, whom you 
write to me ought on their arrival to be sent back to their homes. 

His Highness the Viceroy told you in his conversation yesterday 
evening, that according to the understanding with Mazloum Bey, that 
would not have been absolutely necessary ; nevertheless, I can assure you 
M. le Commodore, that those soldiers shall be sent back without delay ; I 
engage that this shall be the case, knowing the exalted sentiments of his 
Highness the Viceroy. 

Receive, &c., 


(Signed) BOGHOS JOUSSOUF. 


261 


Sub-Inclosure 4 in Inclosure 2 in No. 173. 
Extract from the Hatti Sheriff conceding the Hereditary Government of Egypt. 


L’EGYPTE, dans ses anciennes limites, vous est accordée & vous et 
a vos descendans males aux conditions suivantes :— 

1°. Lorsqu’il y aura décés du titulaire, la Porte choisira parmi ses 
héritiers celui qui lui conviendra le mieux, lequel sera appelé A Constan- 
tinople pour recevoir Vinvestiture. La présente concession n’entraine 
aucune préséance sur les autres Vizirs, et le Gouverneur en faveur du- 
quel elle est faite ne jouira quant au titre et aux autres prérogatives que 
des avantages qui lui sont attribués. 

2°. Le Hatti Chérif de Gulhané et les autres lois fondamentales de 
Empire, ainsi que les traités existans ou 4 venir avec les Puissances 
étrangéres, seront exécutés en Egypte. | 

3°. Tous les impéts et tous les revenus de l’Egypte seront percus au 
nom du Sultan; et comme les Egyptiens font partie des sujets du Grand 
Seigneur, les régles adoptés dans le reste de Empire pour le recouvre- 
ment de Vimpét, seront suivies en Egypte. Afin que le Sultan soit bien 
assuré que le peuple n’est pas pressuré, un quart des revenus bruts 
provenant soit des douanes, soit des dimes, ou de tous autres droits, 
appartiendra au Sultan et tiendra lieu de tribut; les trois autres quarts 
seront affectés a l’acquittement des frais de recouvrement et des dépenses 
concernant l’administration intérieure, ’entretien des troupes, la maison 
du Viceroi, et les redevances en nature attribuées chaque année aux 
Villes Saintes. Les dispositions précédentes seront appliquées a dater du 
premier jour de Vannée 1257 (aujourd’hui) pour avoir leur exécution 
pendant cing ans, lequel terme expiré, il sera avisé selon les circonstances 
et ’état de Egypte. Pour que les impéts ne soient pas pergus d’une 
maniere arbitraire et préjudicielle au peuple, le Sultan ayant contracté 
Pobligation de veiller aux intéréts de ses sujets, juge que la présence d’un 
contréleur des finances est nécessaire en Egypte; vous vous conformerez 
4 Vordre qui vous sera transmis ultérieurement a ce sujet. 

4°. Il doit étre pris 4 Constantinople des mesures pour que les mon- 
naies soient frappées au méme type, comme aussi a un titre et 4 un poids 
en rapport avec leur valeur; les monnaies frappées en Egypte au nom du 
Sultan devront l’étre d’aprés le taux adopté. 

5°. Pendant la paix, Egypte peut se garder avec 18,000 soldats ; ce. 
nombre ne sera pas dépassé; et comme les forces de terre et de mer de 
VEgypte sont a la disposition de Empire, la Porte en cas de guerre 
déterminera l’augmentation qui doit leur étre donnée. Dans les autres 
parties de l’Empire, aprés un service de cing ans le soldat est libre; cette 
régle sera exécutée en Egypte. En conséquence, sur l’armée existante 
on choisira, et d’aprés le tems de service, 20,000 hommes, dont 18,000 
serviront en Egypte, et 2,000 seront envoyés 4 Constantinople. Tous les 
ans il sera procédé par la voie du sort, conformément aux régles de Péquité 
et proportionnellement a la population de chaque localité, au recrutement de 
4,000 hommes, dont 3,600 seront incorporés dans les troupes de Il’Egypte, 
et 400 seront dirigés sur Constantinople, le tout en remplacement des 
congédiés. Les soldats libérés du service ne pourront pas ¢tre rappelés 
sous les armes. II est possible que, pour I’étoffe, les troupes ne puissent pas 
étre habillées en Egypte comme elles le sont 4 Constantinople, mais pour 
la forme des vétemens, pour les insignes et les drapeaux, elles seront 
entiérement semblables. Il en est de méme pour les troupes de mer. 

6°. Le Viceroi d’Egypte ne peut donner des grades que jusqu’a celui 
de Solkal Aghassi (Adjutant-Major); pour les grades supérieurs, ils 
devront étre demandés a la Sublime Porte. 

Il ne pourra pas construire de nouveaux batimens de guerre sans 
Vautorisation de la Porte. 

La conservation de ’hérédité étant attachée a l’exécution de chacune 
de ces dispositions fondamentales, en cas de non exécution la concession 
de Vhérédité sera révoquée. 


262 


(Translation.) 


EGYPT within its ancient limits is granted to you and to your male 
descendants on the following conditions : 

1. When there shall be a decease of the incumbent, the Porte shall 
select among his heirs the person who shall best suit it, who will be sum- 
moned to Constantinople to receive the investiture. The present conces- 
sion does not involve any precedence over the other Viziers, and the 
Governor in whose favour it is made shall, as regards the title and the 
other prerogatives, only enjoy the advantages which are assigned to him. 

2°. The Hatti Sheriff of Gulhané, and the other fundamental laws of 
the empire, as likewise the treaties present or future with foreign Powers, 
shall be executed in Egypt. 

3°. All the duties and all the revenues of Egypt shall be collected in 
the name of the Sultan; and as the Egyptians form a portion of the 
subjects of the Grand Signior, the rules adopted in the rest of the empire 
for the collection of the taxes shall be observed in Egypt. In order that 
the Sultan may be well assured that the people are not over-taxed, a fourth 
part of the gross revenue arising either from customs-duties, tenths, or 
all other duties, shall appertain to the Sultan, and be in the place of tri- 
bute; the other three fourths shall be applied to the liquidation of the 
charges of collection and of the expences concerning the internal admi- 
nistration, the maintenance of the troops, the household of the Viceroy, 
and the contributions in kind allotted every year to the Holy Cities. The 
preceding arrangements shall take effect from the first day of the year 
1257 (the present time), and be carried into execution for five years, at the 
expiration of which term, provision will be made according to the circum- 
stances and condition of Egypt. In order that the duties may not be 
levied arbitrarily and in a manner prejudicial to the people, the Sultan 
having undertaken to watch over the mterests of his subjects, considers 
that the presence of a comptroller of finance is necessary in Egypt: you 
will conform yourself to the order which shall hereafter be sent to you on 
this subject. 

4°. Measures are about to be taken at Constantinople in order that 
the money may be coined of the same die, as likewise of the denomination 
and weight corresponding with its value; the money coined in Egypt in 
the name of the Sultan must be so at the rate adopted. 

5°. During peace, Egypt can be protected by 18,000 soldiers; this 
number shall not be exceeded ; and as the land and sea forces of Egypt 
are at the disposal of the empire, the Porte, in case of war, will fix the 
augmentation which it is requisite to give to them. In the other parts of 
the empire, the soldier, after a service of five years, is free; this rule shall 
be enforced in Egypt. Consequently, there shall be chosen from the 
existing army, and according to the periods of service, 20,000 men, of 
whom 18,000 shall serve in Egypt, and 2,000 shall be sent to Constanti- 
nople. Every year a ballot shall be had, in conformity with the rules of 
equity and in proportion to the population of each district, for the levy of 
4,000 men, of whom 3,600 shall be incorporated into the troops of Egypt, 
and 400 shall be sent to Constantinople, the whole to replace those who 
are discharged. The soldiers liberated from service shall not be reenlisted. 
It is possible that as regards the material, the troops cannot be clad in 
Kgypt as they are at Constantinople, but as regards the shape of the 
clothing, the badges, and the standards, they shall be wholly alike. The 
same is the case with regard to the naval forces. 

6°. The Viceroy of Egypt cannot confer ranks except up to that of 
Solkal-Aghassi (adjutant-major); as regards the superior ranks, they 
must be applied for to the Sublime Porte. 


7 eo ships of war shall not be built without the permission of the 
orte. 


The continuance of the hereditary succession being subject to the 
execution of each of these fundamental dispositions, in case of non-exe- 
cution, the concession of hereditary succession will be revoked. 


—_— ee SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSeSSeeeSe 


263 


No. 174. 


The Plenipotentiaries of the Four Powers to Chekib Effendi. 


Londres, le 13 Mars, 1841. 


LES Soussignés, Plénipotentiaires des Cours d’Autriche, de la 
Grande Bretagne, de Prusse, et de Russie, ont eu ’honneur de recevoir 
la Note en date du 11 de ce mois, par laquelle son Excellence 
Chékib Effendi, Ambassadeur Extraordinaire de la Sublime Porte Otto- 
mane, a bien voulu leur annoncer, qu’en conséquence des preuves que 
Méhémet Ali Pacha a données de sa soumission, Sa Hautesse vient 
d’accomplir gracieusement sa promesse en le réintégrant sous certaines 
conditions au poste du Gouvernement de Egypte, avec hérédité. 

En notifiant cette détermination aux Plénipotentiaires des Quatre 
Cours Alliées, M. ’ Ambassadeur Ottoman a bien voulu leur communiquer 
en méme tems les firmans émanés a cet effet le 13 Février, 1841, ainsi 
que la Note adressée le méme jour par son Excellence Réchid Pacha aux 
Représentans des Quatre Cours 4 Constantinople, par laquelle la Sublime 
Porte annonce que la Question d’Egypte se trouve terminée. 

Les Soussignés se font un devoir d’exprimer a M. l’Ambassadeur 
Ottoman, au'nom de leurs Cours, la vive satisfaction que leur a fait 
éprouver cet événement, qui, en amenant la crise du Levant 4a une 
solution définitive, réalise pleinement les intentions bienveillantes qui ont 
servi de guide a la politique des Cours signataires de la Convention du 15 
Juillet. 

Dans cet état des choses, les Quatre Cours ont répondu d’avance au 
désir que la Porte a exprimé de voir leurs Consuls retourner 4 Alexandrie; 
et le Protocole signé a Londres le 5 de ce mois a déja invité les Représen- 
tans des Quatre Puissances a s’entendre avec la Porte, pour fixer le 
moment ou les dits agens devront simultanément retourner en Egypte. 

Quant aux détails qui concernent l’administration intérieure de cette 
province, et auxquels se référent les firmans émanés le 13 Feévrier, les 
Soussignés viennent d’étre informés d’Alexandrie, en date du 24 du méme 
mois, que la majeure partie de ces points se trouve déja réglée. 

En effet, Méhémet Ali a reconnu, sans réserve aucune, que tous les 
traités et toutes les lois de |’ Empire devront s’appliquer 4 PEgypte comme 
a toute autre province de cet Empire; il a souscrit aux ordres qui lui ont 
été adress¢és par la Sublime Porte pour régler en Egypte le systéme moné- 
taire, la levée, le service, et l’uniforme des troupes, et la construction des 
batimens de guerre; il a replacé sous les ordres de Sa Hautesse le Sultan, 
les forces de terre et de mer de |’Egypte, dont la Sublime Porte elle-méme 
vient de déterminer le nombre ; en un mot, il se trouve aujourd’hui légale-. 
ment placé envers la Sublime Porte dans la situation d’un sujet, Gouverneur 
délégué d’une province faisant partie intégrante de !Empire Ottoman. 

En partant de ce principe, que la Convention du 15 Juillet était des- 
tinée a rétablir, c’est 4 Vautorité seule du Sultan, qu'il appartient aujour- 
@hui de résoudre les questions d’administration intérieure qui restent. 
encore a régler, et de prendre en considération les voeux que Méhémet Ali 
a soumis a ce sujet a la décision de Sa Hautesse. 

Sans entrer 4 cet égard dans un examen qui ne serait point de leur 
ressort, les Soussignés ne peuvent se référer qu’aux principes énoncés 
dans la Note Collective qu’ils ont eu Vhonneur d’adresser 4 M.lAmbas- 
sadeur Ottoman sous la date du 30 Janvier. 

Ces principes, basés sur les conditions de l’Acte Séparé de la Conven- 
tion du 15 Juillet, serviront de régle aux explications amicales que les 
Représentans des Quatre Cours pourraient encore étre appelés a offrir a 
la Sublime Porte. dist 
_ Les Soussignés ont la ferme assurance que ces explications, concues 
dans un sincére esprit de conciliation, trouveraient aupres du Sultan le 
méme accueil qu’il n’a cessé de faire aux conseils déja donnés par ses 
Alliés,—conseils désintéressés et sincéres que Sa Hautesse a justement 


264 


appréciés, lorsqu’elle a accompli, par un acte de clémence, une ceuvre de 
pacification que ses Alliés l'avaient loyalement aidé a assurer. 
Les Soussignés, &c., &c., 
ESTERHAZY. NEUMANN. 
PALMERSTON. 
BULOW. 
BRUNNOW. 


(Translation. ) 


London, March 13, 1841. 


THE Undersigned, Plenipotentiaries of the Courts of Austria, Great 
Britain, Prussia, and Russia, have had the honour to receive the note dated the 
11th of this month, by which his Excellency Chekib Effendi, Ambassador 
Extraordinary of the Sublime Ottoman Porte, has had the goodness to announce 
to them that in consequence of the proofs which Mehemet Ali has given of his 
submission, His Highness has graciously fulfilled his promise by reinstating him, 
under certain conditions, in the post of the Government of Egypt, with hereditary 
succession. its ’ 

In notifying this determination to the Plenipotentiaries of the Four Allied 
Courts, the Ottoman Ambassador has had the goodness to communicate to them 
at the same time the firmans issued to this effect on the 13th of February, 
1841, as well as the note addressed the same day by his Excellency Rechid 
Pasha to the Representatives of the Four Courts at Constantinople, by which 
the Sublime Porte announces that the question of Egypt is ended. 

The Undersigned make it their duty to express to the Ottoman Ambassador, 
in the name of their Courts, the lively satisfaction which has been occasioned to 
them by this event, which, by bringing the crisis of the Levant to a definitive 
solution, fully realizes the benevolent intentions which have guided the policy 
of the Courts who signed the Convention of the 15th of July. 

In this state of things, the Four Courts have replied by anticipation to the 
desire expressed by the Porte to see their Consuls return to Alexandria; and 
the Protocol signed at London on the Sth of this month has already requested 
the Representatives of the Four Powers to come to an understanding with the 
Porte, in order to fix the period when the said agents should simultaneously 
return to Egypt. 

With regard to the details concerning the internal administration of that 
province, and to which the firmans issued on the 13th of February relate, the 
Undersigned have just been informed from Alexandria, under date the 24th of 
the same month, that the greater part of these points are already settled. 

In fact, Mehemet Ali has admitted, without any reserve, that all the 
treaties and all the laws of the empire should apply to Egypt. as to every other 
province of that Empire; he has acceded to the orders addressed to him by the 
Sublime Porte for the regulation in Egypt of the monetary system, the con- 
scription, the service and the uniform of the troops, and the building of ships 
of war; he has replaced under the orders of His Highness the Sultan the land 
and sea forces of Egypt, of which the Sublime Porte has itself now fixed the 
number ; in a word, he is at the present moment legally placed towards the Porte 
in the situation of a subject, the delegated Governor of a province constituting 
an integral part of the Ottoman Empire. 

Setting out from this principle, which it was the object of the Convention of 
the 15th of July to re-establish, it appertains at present to the authority of the 
Sultan alone to settle the questions of internal administration which still remain 
to be adjusted, and to take into consideration the wishes which Mehemet Ali has 
submitted on this matter to His Highness’s decision. 

Without entering in this respect into an inquiry which would not be within 
their competence, the Undersigned can only refer to the principles expressed in 
the Collective Note which they had the honour to address to the Ottoman 
Ambassador on the 30th of. January. 

Those principles, founded on the conditions of the Separate Act of the 
Convention of the 15th of July, will serve as a rule for the friendly explanations 


which the Representatives of the Four Courts might still be called upon to offer 
to the Sublime Porte. 


265 


The Undersigned are fully assured that these explanations, conceived in a 
sincere spirit of conciliation, would be received by the Sultan in the same manner 
in which he has constantly received the advice already given by his Allies,— 
advice disinterested and sincere, which His Highness has justly appreciated, 
when he accomplished, by an act of clemency, a work of pacification which his 
Allies had frankly aided him in effecting. 

The Undersigned, &c., 


(Signed) ESTERHAZY. NEUMANN. 
PALMERSTON. 
BULOW. 
BRUNNOW. 
eee eee eee re et et le eee 2g ey 
No. 175. 


Sir John Barrow to Lord Leveson. 


My Lord, Admiralty, March 13, 1841. 


{1 AM commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, to 
send you herewith, for the information of Viscount Palmerston, copies of 
a letter from Admiral the Honourable Sir Robert Stopford, dated the 
Ist of March last, with its several inclosures, detailing more. particu- 
larly the proceedings attending the evacuation of Syria by the Egyptian 
troops. I have, &c., 

(Signed) JOHN BARROW. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 175. 


Admiral Stopford to R. More O’Ferrall, Esq. 


Sir, ‘© Princess Charlotte,’ Malta, March 1, 1841. 


WITH reference to my letters of the 19th and 28th ultimo, trans- 
mitting copies of Captain Stewart’s despatches from Jaffa and Beyrout, 
the latter comunicating the entire evacuation of Syria by the Egyptian 
army, I beg leave now to forward the copies of letters and other docu- 
ments, detailing more particularly the proceedings which latterly attended 
that result. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) ROBERT STOPFORD, 
Admiral. 


Sub-Inclosure 1 in No. 175. 
Captain Houston Stewart te Admiral Stopford. 


, British Head Quarters, Jaffa, 
Sir, January 17, 1841. 


MY letter of the 10th instant, forwarded by ‘‘ Gorgon,” would inform 
you of Brigadier-General Michell’s and my own determination to confine 
ourselves strictly to precautionary and defensive operations. It will 
therefore be necessary to explain the circumstances attending a late 
advance of the Turkish troops upon Gaza, and for this purpose I transmit 
herewith copies of a letter which I addressed to General Jochmus* im- 
mediately after our last conference on the 12th instant, also of a note 
which I received from General Michell, after he had reached Ramla, 
and my reply to that note, sent by a staff officer to General Michell at 


Ashdod. 5; 
General Michell expressed in the most decided and unequivocal 


* N.B. Owing to General Jochmus’s immediate departure, he did not receive my letter until 


his return. 
2M 


266. 


terms his disapprobation of the expedition. We both appealed to the 
Seraskier, who refused to incur the responsibility of putting his written: 
veto on the advance, without which General Jochmus declared he should 
persevere, and accordingly he left Jaffa for Ramla within an hour. 
General Michell then felt that he was in a peculiarly awkward position, 
but with the true spirit of an English soldier, determined to accompany: 
and render every assistance in his power to the Turkish Generals. 

I also felt myself bound, notwithstanding my protest, to go down 
with the “Vesuvius” and “Hecate,” and make a demonstration on the coast, 
especially as I thought I might render material assistance, by either 
threatening a descent on the Egyptians’ rear to the southward of Gaza, 
by which their retreat on El-Arish would be endangered, or, in case of 
the Turks retreating, protecting with the great guns that hazardous 
operation. : ; 

At 4 a.m. of Friday the 15th, we weighed in the “Vesuvius” and 
“Hecate,” and proceeded as far as Ascalon, when the weather became so 
thick, and blew so hard, with a heavy increasing sea, that after showing 
ourselves again off Jaffa, I requested Captain Henderson to run out 
fifteen or twenty miles for an offing, bank up the fires, and put the 
vessels under canvass. At 2 a.m. on the 16th, it being then more mo- 
derate, we bore up, and at daylight we put the steam on and steered 
towards Ascalon, but on getting sight of the beach, the surf was so 
excessive as to preclude all hope of being able to communicate with the 
shore for many hours to come. We therefore unwillingly returned off 
Jaffa, where we were not able to effect a landing until sunset, when I 
found General Michell just returned, having preceded the returning 
Turkish troops. The Seraskier had reached Jaffa about two hours pre- 
vious to General Michell. 

I ought to have stated, that by General Michell’s desire, twenty-five 
marines were embarked on board the ‘‘ Vesuvius’ under command of Lieu- 
tenant Anderson, and a like number on board the “ Hecate ;” these have 
all since been disembarked here. : 

Brigadier-General Michell will send you an account of what occurred. 
It would appear that the state of the weather was such as to make it 
advisable, in General Jochmus’s opinion, to return. There was a smart 
skirmishing affair with a part of the enemy’s cavalry which were on a 
reconnoissance, in which, I hear from every quarter that the English 
staff officers were most forward and dashing. Colonel Rose, Assistant 
Adjutant General, received two wounds, but is rapidly recovering. Mr. 
Frederick Crawford, Midshipman of the “Benbow,” zealously emulated 
the spirit and daring of the military officers. 

Since writing the above, Lieutenant Loring of the “ Carysfort,” accom- 
panied by Hamid Bey, arrived from Alexandria, bringing me despatches 
from Commodore Sir C. Napier. These officers, accompanied by Major 
Wilbraham, were immediately forwarded on to Jerusalem in search of 
Ibrahim Pasha, and it was my intention at once to have despatched the 
“Vesuvius” to Marmorice, touching at Acre, Sidon, and Beyrout, for in- 
valids ; but news has just reached the Seraskier, stating that Ibrahim 
Pasha was at Jericho, and threatening the troops under Rechid Pasha at 
Jerusalem. | 

In such circumstances General Michell deems it more prudent to 
keep both the steam-vessels off this place, until we shall have been able to 
ascertain how Ibrahim Pasha receives his father’s orders to evacuate 
Syria, and the letters which we have written to him, anxiously recom- 
tending to him to second our sincere desire to avoid all unhappy 
collisions. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) HOUSTON STEWART, 
Captain and Senior Officer on the Coast of Syria 


267 


Sub-Inclosure 2 in No. 175. 
Captain Houston Stewart to General Jochmus. 


British Head-Quarters, Jaffa, 
wiry i January 12, 1841, 3 p.m. 
__. IN order that there may be no misapprehension on the subject of our 
Conferences yesterday and to-day, I think it right to put the particulars 
into writing. 

When Rechid Pasha came to General Michell and myself yesterday 
morning, he stated that Ibrahim Pasha’s army being now fairly entered 
on the Desert, there could be no reason for the 3,000 Egyptian men 
quartered at Gaza, being permitted to remain there, and asked us if we 
would concur in an advance which should have the effect of ridding the 
Syrian country of the plunderers. General Michell and I both said that 
our instructions being to facilitate the evacuation of Syria by the 
Egyptians, there could be no political reason to prevent our co-operation, 
and that, provided the forces advanced were so great as to make resist- 
ance hopeless, and certain information received of Ibrahim Pasha having 
advanced south of any road by which he could march upon Gaza, there 
appeared, to be none of a military nature. 


Very shortly after this, Rechid Pasha returned with your Excellency, _ 


when the same points were distinctly stated, and you expressed your 
conviction of the impossibility of Ibrahim’s coming upon Gaza; that we 
should advance close to it, and you would send notice to the Egyptian 
troops, that they might have twenty-four hours to retreat, after which 
you would attack and occupy Gaza. Rechid Pasha said he would go 
immediately to Jerusalem, from whence he would write positive informa- 
tion upon which we might safely rely; that we should not move from this 
place until we received his communications. After his departure, General 
Michell and I paid your Excellency two visits, in which we found out, on 
examination of maps and Egyptian officers who had deserted from Gaza, 
that it was not only possible but very probable that Ibrahim might come 
on Gaza by the end of the Dead Sea, and that he might reach it within 
two days of the time in which your troops could. You then avowed that 
your aim was not to facilitate his retreat, but to annihilate his army, and 
prevent a single Egyptian getting back to his own country. 

“The Seraskier Zacharias Pasha, your Excellency, General Michell, 
and myself had a meeting this forenoon, at which you stated it to be your 
determination to advance; that you had orders for the troops at Jerusalem 
to make a combined movement on Gaza with those from Ramla; and that 
6,000 men and 1,400 cavalry (900 of them being irregular), with twenty- 
four guns, would attack Gaza, destroy the provisions, and immediately 
retire, leaving two battalions in the place; that if Ibrahim Pasha 
appeared you would retire, and that, if he pressed you, you could retreat on 
the mountains near Jerusalem. There appeared to General Michell.and to 
me such an evident and imminent hazard in this operation, and so inade- 
quate an object to be gained, so much evil would result from a retrograde 
movement, such disaster from defeat, that I declared I could be no party 
to it, and that so long as it was not ascertained beyond doubt that 
Ibrahim Pasha was not coming on Gaza, I could not afford any naval 
co-operation. ; 

It is with sincere pain that I have come to this resolution; your 
Excellency has had no reason to doubt the hearty co-operation hitherto 
of Her Britannic Majesty’s naval forces in promoting the Sultan’s cause ; 
but I should be betraying my trust, and acting in direct opposition to my 
orders, if 1 concurred in any operations which had for their object the 
prevention or suspension of Ibrahim Pasha’s evacuation of Syria. 

T have, &c., 
(Signed) HOUSTON STEWART, 
Captain and Senior Officer commanding Her Britannic Majesty’s 
ships and vessels on the Coast of Syria. 


2M 2 


268 


Sub-Inclosure 3 in No. 175. 
General Michell to Captain Houston Stewart. 


My dear Commodore, Ramla, January 13, Noon. 
1 HAVE found Seraskier, Jochmus, Wood, &c., all halted here. I 
have a letter from Napier at Jerusalem; Rechid Pasha moves with the 
Jerusalem battalions on to-morrow morning the 14th. The troops here 
move to-morrow also for Ashdod (or Ichdod), half way to Gaza: thus it 
will be better for you not to approach that part of the coast till the even- 
ing of to-morrow the 14th or the morning of the 15th. Rose goes with 
this to Jaffa, so I write; but we have not yet had a satisfactory conference, 
and I hope to be able to write to you again by Major Robe, and to give 
more full details as to our probable proceedings, and as to the most 
effectual support to be given to them by your appearance on the coast. 

Mr. Wood is prepared to give us in writing very powerful arguments 
in favour of a continuance of active offensive operations. His letter from 
Lord Ponsonby, after Captain Fanshawe’s arrival at Constantinople, is 
strong upon the subject. 

In case there should be no other letter from me you may consider 
that we shall approach Gaza on the 15th, and possibly early. Your 
demonstration may be made accordingly north and south of it, as you 
proposed, to-morrow afternoon and Friday morning. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) EDWARD MICHELL. 

P.S.—General Jochmus thinks he may be able to attack Gaza on 
Friday afternoon, therefore your demonstration should be made as I have 
stated, Take a few artillerymen if you like. 


Sub-Inclosure 4 in No. 175. 


Captain Houston Stewart to General Michell, . 


Jaffa, January 14, 1841, 
(Extract.) Thursday, 10 A.M. 


THE weather has changed, as I expected, with the phase of the moon, 
which quarters this day, but I hope the wind will not get so far to the 
westward as to make it impossible to communicate with you from the 
steam-vessels off Gaza. Our starting too soon might have one of two 
effects : either it might induce the Egyptians to retire at once if they have 
notice of your advance, and despair of Ibrahim Pasha’s, or it might cause 
them to make preparations to strengthen themselves within Gaza in the 
hope of giving Ibrahim time tocome up. In this view I think it might be 
more wise not to show the steamers off the coast until a few hours before 
the advance of General Jochmus, and therefore I shall not leave this till 
4 a.m. to-morrow (Friday), and, weather permitting, shall be off Gaza and a 
little below it by 8 a.m., before which time I deem it impossible for the 
Turkish troops to be in a position to attack Gaza. Notwithstanding all 
Mr. Wood would say or write, I am still of opinion that we are bound 
strictly and simply to such measures as tend to facilitate and not to 
embarrass the Egyptian army’s retreat out of Syria. 

We know Lord Palmerston’s and the British Government’s wishes 
and orders; Lord Ponsonby’s orders must with us be subordinate to Lord 
Palmerston’s; and when Fanshawe reached and left Constantinople, Lord 
Ponsonby did not know that the British Government had actually approved 
of Napier’s Convention with the sole exception of the hereditary part of 
it, which in Mehemet Ali’s letter of submission is not insisted on, 
We have promised the Admiral that we will act strictly on precautionary 
and defensive principles. 

If [brahim Pasha is coming to Gaza, things will be very serious. If 
on the contrary, he is really going the other road, then it is a matter of no 
importance, and assumes the light in which it was first presented to us by 
Rechid Pasha and Jochmus, to which we assented. 


2969 


Sub-Inclosure 5 in No. 175. 


Brigadier- General Michell to Admiral Stopford. 


My dear Sir, Jaffa, January 17, 1841. 


KNOWING that Captain Stewart writes to you fully upon the late 
_ events on this part of the coast, I think it unnecessary to trouble you 
with details, and shall, therefore, merely forward a copy of aletter* which 
General Jochmus has given me, as the substance of what he has to com- 
municate to you, and add some observations of my own. 

The movement upon Gaza seemed to be for a time abandoned, but 
on the 11th of January, General Jochmus again proposed it, and at 
length persuaded the new Seraskier, and his influential staff officer and 
adviser, Rechid Pasha, to adopt his views upon the subject. For my own 
part, | was more than ever opposed to the measure, influenced in parti- 
cular by your last letters, but also by military reasons. The attack was, 
however, resolved on, and I could not do otherwise than accompany the 
troops to witness the results. 

My own natural feelings prompted this determination, and it was in 
fact fully justified, if not enjoined, by a paragraph in Lord Palmerston’s 
instructions to Sir Charles Smith, with which you are acquainted. 

Bad weather, delay in the march of the co-operating battalions from 
Jerusalem, the non-arrival of the expected cavalry from the mountains, 
all these being circumstances which | had more or less anticipated, 
caused the operation to be abandoned. ; 

_In the mean time, a body of Egyptian cavalry having made an 
attack upon a village which we occupied, the skirmish of which General 
Jochmus makes mention, occurred on the 15th, near Ascalon, and the 
result was decidedly advantageous and creditable to the Turkish 
troops. 

"The English staff-officers were forward, conspicuous, and useful on 
the occasion. Colonel Rose, after displaying much personal prowess on 
the occasion, received two wounds, which at first appeared to me of a 
serious nature, but I am happy to say he is now doing well, and there is 
no doubt of his speedy recovery. 

I must also state to you that much praise is due to Mr. Frederick 
Crawford, Midshipman of Her Majesty’s ship “ Benbow,”’ who by Captain 
Stewart’s permission accompanied me as an extra aide-de-camp, and who 
throughout the movements, but more particularly in the affair of the 
15th, distinguished himself by his zeal, activity, intelligence, and courage. 

The troops had scarcely returned to Jaffa when Lieutenant Loring 
of Her Majesty’s ship “ Carysfort,” arrived in company with an Egyptian 
officer, bringing despatches from Commodore Sir Charles Napier, which 
announced the conclusion of his Treaty with Mehemet Ali, and also orders 
from the now re-instated Pasha of Egypt to his son, for the immediate 
evacuation of Syria. 

These officers were immediately provided with horses and escort ‘and 
sent off to Jerusalem, accompanied by a staff-officer of the Seraskier, and 
by Major Wilbraham, one of the English Adjutant-Generals under my 
command, with instructions and credentials to proceed to the head- 
quarters of the Egyptian Army; and in the meantime it has been directed 
that the Turkish troops shall be limited to purely defensive and protective - 
operations. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) EDWARD MICHELL. 


* Sub-Inclosure 32 in No. 175. 


270 


Sub-Inclosure 6 in No. 175. 
Colonel Bridgeman to Admiral Stopford. 


‘ Head- Quarters, Jaffa, 
- Sir, January 26, 1841. 


WITH the deepest and most unfeigned sorrow I have to commu- 
nicate to your Excellency the death of Brigadier-General Michell. This 
afflicting event took place at Jaffa on Sunday last, the 24th instant, after 
an illness of four days. 

Constant exposure to the rain, during the operations upon Gaza, 
induced fever, and his constitution, which had been much broken by many 
severe wounds, was unable to withstand the weakening and prostrating 
effects of the disease. 

The command of the British troops in Syria has devolved therefore 
upon me, as the senior officer, and incompetent as I may be to its very 
many responsible duties, I have the satisfaction of believing that your 
Excellency will permit me to profit by your advice and counsel, and that 
whilst I am in immediate communication with Captain Houston Stewart, 
I shall have the advantage of his sound judgment and experience. 

. I have, &c., 
(Signed) E. H. BRIDGEMAN, . 
Colonel. 


Sub-Inclosure 7 in No. 175. 


Captain Houston Stewart to Admiral Stopford. 


British Head Quarters, Jaffa, 
(Extract.) January 23, 1841. 


I HAD the honour to receive your letters of the 15th and 16th 
Instant, yesterday, the “Cyclops” having put them on shore at Acre, 
from whence they have been forwarded by a courier. Both General 
Michell and I regretted that Captain Austin conceived he had not time 
to run down here in the terms of general directions left at Beyrout, as his 
immediate return from hence to Marmorice would have conveyed to you 
and to Government the latest intelligence. 

My letter of the 17th instant, which goes by this conveyance, will 
acquaint you with the state of affairs up to that date, and I now beg to 
transmit to you copies of the letters addressed by Brigadier-General 
Michell and myself to Ibrahim Pasha, and to the Egyptian Commanding 
Officer at Gaza, together with the instructions issued to the respective 
officers sent to [brahim Pasha, to accompany Lieutenant-General Jochmus, 
and to Gaza. No instructions for the Turkish authorities had reached 
them either from Alexandria or Constantinople. | 

Fortunately these instructions reached the Seraskier, vid Beyrout, 
two days after the receipt of Commodore Sir Charles Napier’s letter 
from Alexandria. General Michell and myself obtained a positive assur- 
ance that no act of hostility should take place; that a British officer 
should accompany General Jochmus; and Omar Pasha, with Captain 
Arbuthnot, Royal Navy, should proceed in search of Ibrahim Pasha, and 
assure themselves, with the least possible delay, that Ibrahim Pasha 
would obey his father’s orders. Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson, Royal 
Engineers, was sent off to Gaza as Conservator of the Peace, and to 
urge the immediate departure of some of the Egyptian troops from 
thence towards Egypt. I inclose copies of the instructions issued to all 
these officers, as well as of protests which Lieutenant-General Jochmus 
and Mr. Wood thought proper to write to the Seraskier, after the resolu- 
tion of the Council of War which had been held. 

The Memoranda to the officers are signed by me for General Michell, 


271 


by. his own express desire, as 1 regret to say, he was too ill to write, and 
Colonel Bridgeman also so ill as to be confined to bed. General Michell 
went to bed complaining of fever and ague, after the termination of 
the Council of the 19th instant, and has not been well enough to rise yet, 
but every thing has been done by his desire and consent. 

The fatigue and exposure incurred during the advance towards 
Gaza on the 14th, 15th, and 16th, have been the cause of his illness, and 
the numerous severe wounds which he received in former campaigns, 
make his bodily sufferings very great. 

TI only keep the “ Dido” until I shall be enabled to communicate to 
you how Ibrahim Pasha receives the intelligence from Alexandria, when 
I will immediately despatch her: but from the want of information as 
to his exact position, and from the dangers of the road caused by tribes 
of wandering [Arabs], who attack friend or foe, it may be some time yet, 
ere any of the officers are enabled to send us satisfactory intelligence of 
their having found him. 


Sub-Inclosure 8 in No. 175. 
Brigadier-General Michell and Captain Houston Stewart to Ibrahim Pasha. 


British Head Quarters, 
General, Jaffa, January 17, 1841. 
WE have the satisfaction to inform your Excellency, that we have 
this day received instructions to permit the embarkation of the sick, the 
wounded, and the women and children of the Egyptian army, at Caiffa, 
‘or any other point of Syria, which may be more convenient to their 
present position; and further, that we are recommended to afford every 
facility for the evacuation of Syria by the army under your Excellency’s 
command, in order that such evacuation may be effected with the least 
possible loss of life; and we beg to assure your Excellency of our cordial 
wish and desire that such measures may be adopted on both sides as may 
ensure the avoidance of any unhappy collisions ; and we trust, that your 
‘Excellency, animated by the same feelings, will issue your orders in 
‘accordance with this principle. 

= 3 (Signed) EDWARD MICHELL, 
Brigadier-General commanding Her Britannic Maesty’s Land Forces 

on the Coast of Syria. 
(Signed) HOUSTON STEWART, 
Captain of Her Britannic Majesty’s ship ‘‘ Benbow,”’ 
and Senior Officer on the Coast of Syria. 


Sub-Inclosure 9 in No. 175. 


Brigadier-General Michell and Captain Houston Stewart to the Officer Command- 
ing the Egyptian Troops at Gaza. 


é British Head Quarters, 
Sir, Jaffa, January 17, 1841. 

WE have the honour to inform you, that we have received official 
instructions, to the effect that “ Mehemet Ali having made his submission 
‘to the Porte, which has been accepted, his Highness is now re-instated in 
the Pashalic of Egypt ;” and we are ordered to afford every facility for the 
evacuation of Syria by the Egyptian troops under the command of his 
Excellency, Ibrahim Pasha. 

An Egyptian officer, sent by Mehemet Ali Pasha, accompanied by a 
Turkish and two English officers, go off from this place to-day, in search 
of Ibrahim Pasha, being the bearers of despatches from Mehemet Ali 
Pasha, requiring him immediately to withdraw, with all his troops, from 
Syria. We therefore most earnestly call upon you, most strictly to 


272. 


abstain from every act which can tend to provoke any renewal of hos- 
tilities, and we promise you in return, that our Allies the Turks shall 
refrain from any aggression towards you. All plundering, and even 
foraging, must be strictly forbidden, otherwise we shall hold you respon- 
sible for the consequences, which in that case we should not have the 


ower to control. 
P We have, &c., 


(Signed) EDWARD MICHELL, 
Brigadier-General commanding the British Troops 
on the Coast of Syria. 
(Signed) HOUSTON STEWART, 
Senior Naval Officer on the Coast of Syria. 


P.S.—The officers who proceed in search of Ibrahim Pasha, will g0 
by Jerusalem, Jericho, and Izatt, but if you know of any more direct 
route by which letters might reach his Excellency, we request you will 
not lose a moment in forwarding to him copies of this and the other 
documents transmitted to you from hence. 


Sub-Inclosure 10 in No, 175. 
Memorandum for Colonel Colquhoun’s guidance. 


Jaffa, January 21, 1841. 


THE Turkish General-in-Chief has declared solemnly that he has no 
wish whatever to deprive Ibrahim of his arms, baggage, or guns, and 
certainly will do nothing to render him desperate, or to provoke hos- 
tilities. You are required to accompany General Jochmus, on the part of 
General Michell and the British forces, to see that this declaration be 
acted up to, General Jochmus being bound to do nothing beyond what 
may be justly necessary for measures of precaution and defence. You 
will report proceedings as frequently as possible to General Michell. 

It is proposed to invite [brahim Pasha to retire upon Egypt, wd 
Gaza, (should he wish it,) in successive columns, none of which must 
exceed 3,000 men, he receiving the guarantee of the Seraskier, the 
General, and the Senior Naval Officer, that these columns shall not be 
molested in any way, so long as they themselves abstain from hostilities. 

Should you observe any disposition on the part of the Officer com- 
manding the Turkish troops to infringe on the above principles, you will 
advise him to abstain, and should he persist, you will formally protest 
against such disposition. 

By desire of GENERAL MICHELL, 
(Signed) HOUSTON STEWART. 


Sub-Inclosure 11 in No. 175. 
Memorandum for Captain Arbuthnot’s guidance. 


Jaffa, January 21, 1841. 


THE Turkish General-in-Chief, Seraskier Zacharias Pasha, has 
declared solemnly that he has no wish whatever to deprive [brahim Pasha 
of his arms, baggage, or guns, and that he will certainly do nothing to 
render him desperate, or to provoke hostilities. You are required to 
accompany Omar Pasha to Ibrahim Pasha, and there propose to him to 
retire immediately from Syria, with the whole of his troops. You will 
endeavour to induce him to allow all the Syrian conscripts he may have 
with his army, to return to their country with their arms; and should he 
wish to retire by the way of Gaza, he must do so in successive columns of 
troops, not exceeding 3,000 men each, until every Egyptian shall have 
passed the frontier. The Seraskier, General Michell, and Captain 
Houston Stewart offer their guarantee that these columns shall not be in 


a Se eer Te ee eee ’ 
ae oy fe ) . — - . 


273° 


any manner molested in their retreat, so long as they themselves abstain 
from hostilities. The women, children, sick, and wounded, and medical 
attendants, will be permitted to embark at any port of Syria which 
Ibrahim Pasha may deem most convenient. But no combatant will be 
allowed to embark unless he previously deliver up his arms. You are to 
understand, that the immediate evacuation of Syria by the whole of the 
Egyptian forces, is the main point, to which all others are secondary. 
You will communicate the result of your mission to me and to Captain 
Stewart, with the utmost possible dispatch, and especially as to the fact 
of whether [brahim Pasha intends to avail himself of the permission to 
embark his women and wounded, where, and about what time,—as the 
Egyptian steamer remains at Caiffa, to carry back information on this 
point to Alexandria, and if necessary, to cause transports to be sent. 
: By desire of GENERAL MICHELL, 
(Signed) HOUSTON STEWART. 


Sub-Inclosure 12 in No. 175. 
Memorandum for Colonel Alderson’s guidance. 


Jaffa, January 22, 1841. 


ACCOUNTS having been received by the Seraskier that a considerable 
number of Egyptian troops have advanced towards Gaza, his Excellency has 
requested that an English officer of rank and discretion should proceed to 
the quarters of the Egyptian officer commanding the troops in that neigh- 
bourhood, to act as Conservator of the Peace. In all probability the 
Egyptian Commandant will not feel himself authorized to order any of these 
troops to retire until he shall receive directions from Ibrahim Pasha; but 
you will point out to him the evident necessity that exists for the avoidance | 
of any the smallest act of hostility or plunder, if he would not break the 
Convention and renew the war. So long as you are satisfied that he is 
acting in good faith, and doing everything possible to maintain order and 
peace towards the Turkish troops and inhabitants of the neighbourhood, 
you will remain with him, taking occasion at all times to point out and 
to urge upon him the propriety of hastening, by any means in his power, 
the evacuation of Syria, in the terms of Mehemet Ali Pasha’s order to his 
son [brahim Pasha. Should you have reason to object to any of his pro- 
ceedings, you will at once remonstrate and protest : should he persist, you 
will formally take your leave, and immediately return to the British head- 
quarters, giving notice that you have done so to the officer commanding 
the nearest post of the Ottoman troops, and putiing him on his guard. 
You will communicate with head-quarters as frequently as possible, and 
notify as exactly as you can the number and state of the Egyptian troops 
in that district. 

You will have with you copies of the letters which have been 
forwarded to Ibrahim Pasha, and of Commodore Sir Charles Napier’s 
letters from Alexandria to General Michell and to Captain Stewart. The 
Seraskier Pasha has declared that he has no design to deprive the 
Egyptians of their arms, baggage, or guns; and that he wishes, by every 
fair and safe means, to facilitate the retirement from Syria of the Egyptian 
forces. Copies of the instructions given to the officers sent to Ibrahim 
Pasha, and to accompany General Jochmus, will also be furnished to you ; 
and you will observe that the immediate evacuation of Syria is the principal 
object to which all others are to be considered as secondary. 

By desire of GENERAL MICHELL, 
(Signed) HOUSTON STEWART. 


oN. 


274 


Sub-Inclosure 13 in No. 175. 


General Jochmus to the Seraskier Ahmed Zacharias Pasha, and Hussein 
Pasha, President of the Aulic Council. 


Excellences, Jaffa, le 21 Janvier, 1841. 


J’AL Vhonneur d’informer vos Excellences, que d’aprés des nouvelles 
officielles de mon Aide-de-Camp le Baron Dumont, les magasins d’Ibrahim 
Pacha a Maan ont été brilés le 15 Janvier; que l’armée d’Ibrahim est 
coupée en deux, et en compléte déroute, rebroussant chemin; qu’en con- 
séquence, ses 150 canons sont déja véritablement en notre pouvoir; et 
que sous ces circonstances, et d’aprés les ordres officiels lus au Conseil 
d’hier, on ne peut permettre a Ibrahim Pacha que le choix des conditions 
suivantes :— 

1. De marcher sur El-Arish par le sud de la Mer Morte, ou bien sur 
Suez, avec les hommes, armes, et moyens de transport qu’il posséde a 
présent. 

2. De venir en détachmens de 3,000 hommes par Gaza sur El-Arish, 
en laissant en nos mains ses canons, en considérant de la grace qui lui 
est accordée de poursuivre ce chemin, pourvu qu'il laisse tous les Syriens 
dans leur pays. 

Il est de la plus urgente nécessité de couvrir toute la Palestine, sans 
un moment de délai, par toutes nos troupes, pour empécher qu’on ne 
saccage et brile le pays par des partis en désespoir, comme Ibrahim en 
a donné le funeste exemple il y a peu de jours a Jéricho; et s'il veut 
pénétrer, aprés nos sommations, par force en Palestine, ce qui n’est nulle- 
ment probable, il faut repousser l’attaque par les armes, car dans Ce cas 
c’est Ibrahim qui rompit la Convention. 

Mr. Wood fera a votre Excellence une déclaration pareille en écrit. 

Je ne saurais prendre la responsabilité personnelle d’aucune autre me- 
sure; car elle compromettrait les intéréts les plus chers, de Sa Majesté 
Impériale notre Auguste Maitre, et ’honneur de nos belles victoires. 

Habe Cala 
(Signé) A. JOCHMUS, 


Lieutenant-Général. 


(Translation.) 


Jaffa, January 21, 1841. 


I HAVE the honour to inform your Excellencies that, according to 
official intelligence from my aide-de-camp, Baron Dumont, the magazines 
of Ibrahim Pasha at Maan were burnt on the 15th of January; that the 
army of Ibrahim is cut in two, and is turning back in thorough disorder ; 
that, consequently, his 150 cannons are already really in our power; and 
that under these circumstances, and according to the official orders 
read at the Council of yesterday, Ibrahim Pasha can only be allowed the 
choice of the following conditions :— 

1, To march upon El-Arish by the south of the Dead Sea, or else upon 
Suez, with the men, arms, and means of conveyance which he now 
possesses. 

2. To come in detachments of 3,000 men by Gaza upon El-Arish, 
leaving his cannons in our hands, in consideration of the favour which is 
granted to him of being permitted to follow this road, provided that he 
leaves all the Syrians in their country. 

It is most urgently necessary to cover the whole of Palestine, without 
a moment’s delay, with all our troops, in order to prevent the sacking 
and burning of the country by parties in’ desperation, of which Ibrahim 
gave a fatal example a few days since at Jericho; and if he attempts, 
after our summons, to penetrate by force into Palestine, which is not at 
all probable, the attack must be repelled by force of arms, for in that case 
it would be Ibrahim who would break the Convention. 


275 


Mr. Wood will make a similar declaration to your Excellency in 
writing. 

I could not undertake the responsibility of any other measure; for it 
would compromise the dearest interests of His Imperial Majesty our 
August Master, and the glory of our great victories. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) A. JOCHMUS, 


Tteutenant- General. 


Sub-Inclosure 14 in No. 175. 


Mr. Wood to the Seraskier Zacharias Pasha, and Hussein Pasha, Pre- 
sident of the Aulic Council. 


Excellences, Ce 21 Janvier, 1841. 


D’APRES les dépéches arrivées aujourd’hui d’Alexandrie de son 
Excellence Mazloum Bey, et dont le Conseil tenu ce matin a eu connais- 
sance, ilne reste aucun doute de l’entiére soumission de Méhémet Ali 
a la volonté de son Auguste Maitre le Sultan. Ces dépéches portent que 
Pévacuation de la Syrie doit s’effectuer sans retard: comme pourtant 
elles ne prescrivent que les moyens d’embarquer les femmes, les malades, 
&c., des échelles de la Syrie, la conciusion est claire, qu’ Ibrahim Pacha et 
son armée doivent se pourvoir d’autres moyens pour se retirer. Les 
lettres du Commodore Napier au Général Michell, ainsi qu’a M. le Capitaine 
Stewart, ne prescrivent non plus aucune autre maniére pour |’évacuation 
de la Syrie par la masse de l’armée ennemie. 

Or, il me semble qu’il est bien entendu qu’Ibrahim Pacha doit rentrer 
en Egypte par le Désert, ou bien en prenant le chemin d’El-Arish, qui est 
la voie la plus directe, et celle qui lui offre les plus grandes facilités pour 
sa retraite. En lui laissant donc cette route libre, nous nous conformons 
au désir de Mazloum Bey et du Commodore d’offrir 4 ’ennemi toutes les 
facilités pour sa retraite, sans pourtant compromettre notre position mili- 
taire. Mazloum Bey nous dit clairement, qu’a son départ de Constantinople 
Vimpression était que l’armée ennemie était complétement désorganisée, et 
que par conséquent trés-faible, mais qu’a son arrivée 4 Alexandrie le Com- 
modore Napier a voulu le détromper sur la faiblesse de ! Armée Egyptienne, 
qu'il prétendait étre nombreuse, pourvue de tous les nécessaires, et en 
état d’offrir de la résistance 4 Varmée Impériale; et par conséquent ses 
rapports sur cette armée étaient si contraires les uns aux autres, qu’il n’a 
pas hasardé dans l’incertitude d’insister auprés de Méhémet Ali sur l’exécu- 
tion de ces deux articles suivans des instructions de la Porte:—l1°. 
Qu’il soit permis a tous les conscrits Syriens de rentrer dans leurs foyers 
avec leurs armes: 2°. Qu’il ne soit permis aux débris de l’armée ennemie 
de se retirer de la Syrie, qu’aprés avoir rendus leurs armes, canons, et 
matériel de guerre; et que par conséquent, comme nous étions sur les 
lieux mémes, nous pouvions étre les meilleurs juges de l’état de l’ennemi, et 
si nous devions ou non insister auprés d’Ibrahim Pacha sur l’exécution de 
ces deux conditions. 

Sur ce point se sont survenues de longues discussions basées sur 
Vopinion personnelle de chaque membre du Conseil selon ses idées de l’état 
de ’ennemi; et comme nous n’en avions pas de renseignemens assez 
positifs pour en former une juste idée, il a été décidé par la majorité du 
Conseil, pour ne pas entraver les négociations, de permettre 4 l'ennemi de 
se retirer sans le faire subir les conditions susdites, quand méme qu’il 
insiste de prendre la route de Gaza. 

Les nouvelles positives, cependant, que nous venons de recevoir de la 
désorganisation compléte de ’armée Egyptienne, de leur manque totale de 
vivres, de sa réduction 4 un fort petit nombre d’hommes capables d’offrir 
résistance, de la destruction de Maan par M. Dumont, du passage déja 
par le Désert des femmes, des bagages, et de la seconde division sous 
Solyman Pacha, réduite a 5,000 hommes, du mouvement rétrograde 
d’Ibrahim Pacha avec une poignée d’hommes dépourvus méme dvartillerie, 

2N 2 


276 


par suite de la destruction de Maan, ne nous laissent plus aucun doute 
de la condition désespérée et de l’anéantissement presque totale de 
l’ennemi. 

| N’ayant donc rien a craindre de l’opposition qu’il pourrait nous offrir, 
il me semble qu’il est de notre devoir de lui imposer ces deux conditions 
susdites, au moins celle qui regarde les conscrits Syriens, en lui offrant 
cet alternatif: ou de rentrer en Egypte par le Désert; ou bien, dans le 
cas quiil est trop faible d’hasarder sa retraite par la voie ci-dessus in- 
diquée, et qu’il demande la permission de venir 4 Gaza, qu’elle ne lui soit 
pas accordée sans qu’il se conforme aux deux conditions susdites. Cela 
serait en méme tems lui accorder les facilités que Mazloum Bey, ainsi que 
le Commodore, nous enjoignent de Jui donner, en se conformant pourtant 
de son cété 4 nos demandes, et aux instructions de la Porte. Si 
pourtant Ibrahim Pacha persiste de venir 4 Gaza sans se soumettre a 
ces conditions, ’agression venant de son cété, il doit bien en étre respon- 
sable; et en subir les conséquences. 

Voila, Excellences, ma faible opinion, que j’ose soumettre a votre 
considération; elle a été formée aprés de mtires réflexions, car je ne 
puis pas cacher de moi-méme, et je manquerais 4 mon devoir, si je ne 
vous faisais part du grand danger que je vois a l’introduction de l’ennemi 
a Gaza, ou, ayant ses communications libres avec l’ Egypte, il pourrait bien 
recruter son armée, et s’y maintenir dans une position menacgante pour 
aider son pére de traiter plus avantageusement pour lui-méme. Car sa 
conduite passée ne nous permet pas de compter trop sur ses paroles. 
Maintenant, méme tandis qu'il a envoyé Hamid Bey a son fils avec 
ordre d’évacuer Ja Syrie, son Général a Gaza nous dit d’avoir des 
nstructions de ne pas nous attaquer, mais de ne nous livrer Gaza qu’avec 
sa vie, malgré que cette ville est une des plus importantes en Syrie. C’est 
par de pareils faits que vos Excellences pourraient juger de la mauvaise 
foi du vassal, qui refuse de rendre ses armes a la demande de son Souve- 
rain, ce qui rend sa soumission incompleéte et méme équivoque. 

Veuillez, &c., 
(Signé) RICHARD WOOD. 


Translation.) 


January 21, 1841. 

ACCORDING to the despatches from his Excellency Mazloum Bey, 
received this day from Alexandria, and of which the Council held this 
morning has taken cognizance, there is no doubt of the entire submission 
- of Mehemet Ali to the will of his August Master the Sultan. Those 
despatches declare that the evacuation of Syria must be effected without 
delay: as, however, they only prescribe the means of embarking the 
women, the sick, &c., from the ports of Syria, it is evidently to be con- 
cluded that Ibrahim Pasha and his army must provide themselves with 
other means of withdrawing themselves. Neither do the letters of Com- 
modore Napier to General Michell, or to Captain Stewart, prescribe any 
other manner for the evacuation of Syria by the mass of the enemy’s 
army. 

Now, it appears to me, that it is well understood that Ibrahim Pasha 
must re-enter Egypt by the Desert, or else by the way of El-Arish, 
which is the most direct road, and that which offers him the greatest 
facilities for his retreat. By leaving this road, then, free, we act in con- 
formity with the desire of Mazloum-Bey and of the Commodore, to offer 
the enemy every facility for his retreat, without, however, compromising 
our military position. Mazloum Bey tells us distinctly that, at the time 
of his departure from Constantinople, the impression was, that the enemy’s 
army was thoroughly disorganized, and consequently very weak ; but that 
on his arrival at Alexandria, Commodore Napier wished to undeceive him 
as to the weakness of the Egyptian army, which he pretended was nume- 
rous, provided with all necessaries, and in a state to offer resistance to the 
Imperial army; and, consequently, his reports with respect to that army 
were so opposed to each other, that he did not venture in the uncertainty to 


°277 


insist with Mehemet Ali upon the execution of the two following Articles 
of the Instructions of the Porte :—1. That all the Syrian conscripts should 
be allowed to return with their arms to their homes. 2. That the remains 
of the enemy’s army should only be permitted to withdraw from Syria, 
after they had delivered up their arms, cannons, and military stores ; and 
that consequently, as we were on the very spot, we were able to be the 
best judges of the state of the enemy, and whether we ought, or not, to 
insist with Ibrahim Pasha upon the execution of these two conditions. 

Upon this point there arose long discussions based upon the personal 
opinion of each member of the Council according to his ideas of the state 
of the enemy; and as we had no information sufficiently positive to enable 
us to form a just opinion thereupon, it was decided by the majority of the 
Council, in order not to obstruct the negotiations, that the enemy should 
be permitted to retreat without subjecting him to the above-named condi- 
tions, even if he should persist in taking the road of Gaza. 

The positive intelligence, however, which we have just received of 
the complete disorganization of the Egyptian Army; of their total want of 
provisions; of its reduction to a very small number of men capable of 
offering resistance; of the destruction of Maan by M. Dumont; of the 
passage over the Desert already, of the women, of the baggage, and of the 
second division under Solyman Pasha, reduced to 5,000 men; of the 
retrograde movement of Ibrahim Pasha with a handful of men deprived 
even of artillery, in consequence of the destruction of Maan; leave us no 
longer any doubt as to the desperate condition and almost entire annihi- 
lation of the enemy. 

Having, then, nothing to fear from the opposition which he could 
offer to us, it appears to me that it is our duty to impose the two above- 
named conditions upon him, at least that which regards the Syrian 
Conscripts, offering him this alternative: either to re-enter Egypt by the 
Desert, or else, in case he should be too weak to venture upon his 
retreat by the above-mentioned way, and that he should ask permission 
to come to Gaza, that that permission should not be granted to him unless 
he acts in accordance with the two above-named conditions. That would 
at the same time be affording him the facilities which Mazloum Bey, as 
well as the Commodore, enjoin us to give him, while, however, he on his 
side complied with our demands, and with the instructions of the Porte. 
If, however, Ibrahim Pasha persists in coming to Gaza without submitting 
to those conditions, the aggression coming from his side, he must certainly 
be responsible for it, and must suffer the consequences. 

This is my humble opinion, which I venture to submit to your Excel- 
lencies’s consideration ; it has been formed after mature reflection; for I 
cannot conceal from myself, and I should fail in my duty if I did not make 
you aware of, the danger which I perceive in the entrance of the enemy 
into Gaza, where, having his communication with Egypt free, he might 
very well recruit his army and maintain himself in a menacing position, in 
order to assist his father in negotiating more advantageously for himself. 
For his past conduct does not permit us to rely too much upon his pro- 
mises. Even, now, while he sent Hamid Bey to his son with orders to 
evacuate Syria, his General at Gaza tells us he has instructions not to 
attack us, but to deliver up Gaza to us only with his life, notwithstanding 
that that is one of the most important towns in Syria. It is from such 
facts that your Excellencies may judge of the bad faith of the Vassal, 
who refuses to surrender his arms upon the demand of his Sovereign, 
which renders his submission incomplete and even doubtful. 

Accept, &c., 
(Signed) RICHARD WOOD 


Sub-Inclosure 15 in No. 175. 


Captain Houston Stewart to Admiral Stopford. 


British Head-Quarters, Jaffa, 
Sir, February 2, 1841. 


IN consequence of the uneasiness evinced by the Turkish Authorities 
at the reported concentration of the Egyptian forces at Gaza, and the 
total want of any correct information as to the actual position of Ibrahim 
Pasha, and consequent ignorance of his intentions with regard to the 
evacuation of Syria, I went to Gaza on the 25th ultimo, and after various 
interviews with Menikli Ahmed Pasha commanding there, we drew up 
the Agreement of which you will receive copies herewith, together with 
the subsequent acceptance of our stipulations on the part of the Turkish 
Authorities here. ; 

The Egyptians were manifestly unwilling to diminish their front until 
assured of the safety of their rear, commanded by Ibrahim in person ; 
but we persuaded them by our guarantee to send off daily two regiments 
of cavalry. It has been extremely difficult to overcome the mistrust 
existing on both sides, and still it requires much attention and caution ; but 
Colonel Bridgeman, who commands the forces, entertains precisely similar 
views with myself, and I hope we shall be able to keep all quiet and right. 
On Sunday afternoon, the 31st of January, Ibrahim Pasha arrived at 
Gaza, and he immediately gave us an audience, and yesterday he gave 
a letter of assurance for the Seraskier, that he meant to comply with his 
father’s orders by immediately evacuating Syria, which I have not the 
least doubt he will perform; but it will require a little time unless the 
wind gets to the eastward, as there have been three transports with 
biscuits for the troops (and intended to receive the women, sick, and 
wounded) off Gaza for six days, without being able to land anything, 
owing to the great surf on the beach. 

Six regiments of cavalry and 2,000 infantry marched last week on 
El-Arish. In consequence of the scantiness of the water in the wells in 
the Desert, it becomes necessary to regulate the march in successive 
columns. Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson, Royal Engineers, and Lieutenant 
Loring, Royal Navy, of Her Majesty’s ship ‘“ Carysfort,” are at Gaza, 
with directions to superintend and report upon the progress of evacuation, 
and I entertain the hope that within a fortnight from this date there will 
not be an armed Egyptian inSyria. On the 26th instant, after my arrival 
at Gaza, finding that the question of Syrian conscripts being allowed 
to remain in Syria with their arms, was anxiously insisted upon by the 
Turks, and as stoutly declined by the Egyptians, it was agreed that those 
who marched in the meantime should be noted in a list given to Colonel 
Alderson, and should the authority come from Alexandria, they were to 
be returned free of expense; and I immediately sent the “ Hecate” on to 
communicate with Commodore Sir Charles Napier on the subject, and to 
get coals. The “Stromboli” returned, bringing me intelligence that Sir 
Charles Napier and Captain Martin were at Cairo, but that Captain Ward 
had (pursuant to instructions given in the event of their absence) an 
interview with Mehemet Ali Pasha, in which he was assured that it had 
been arranged and agreed five days before by himself, the Turkish Com- 
missioner, Mazloum Bey, and the Commodore, that the Syrian conscripts 
should remain with their regiments till their arrival at Alexandria, when 
they would be exchanged for the Egyptians now remaining in Candia, 
the Hedjaz, and at Constantinople. I sent the “Stromboli” back to 
Alexandria last night, and the “Hecate” is just now in sight on her 
way back. 

Ibrahim Pasha sent nearly all his guns, women, and children back to 
Egypt by Suez, under Solyman Pasha’s command, with from 3,000 to 
4,000 men. There cannct be less than 18,000 fighting men now at Gaza; 
the infantry, fatigued and weakened by a long Desert march, [brahim 
having gone very much to the south of the Dead Sea, in order to avoid 
the hostile tribes about El-Hated and the south end of the Dead Sea; but 
the cavalry quite fresh, and the horses in excellent condition. 


279. 


It is my opinion, from all that I have seen and heard, that he will 
take about 28,000 or 30,000 troops back into Egypt. 

I inclose a letter from General Jochmus to the Séeraskier, dated the 
22nd of January, from Jerusalem. 

Colonel Bridgeman has consented to allow the greater ‘part of the 
marines to be embarked at Acre, leaving a Captain’s guard of the 
Strongest and most healthy men on the stores there. Lieutenant-Colonel 
Me Callum is to have his option to remain there for the present in 
charge, or to join head-quarters, or to embark in the “Vesuvius” and 
proceed to Marmorice. I shall direct the “ Vesuvius” to call at Acre and 
Beyrout, and to take all invalids up. There will still remain the marine 
artillery at Sidon; but Captain Steele has received authority to remove to 
Beyrout either by sea or land, should sickness prevail; but there has 
been, according to the best accounts, but one case of plague. The 
“Hazard” is now at Tyre, as being the securest anchorage; the “ Magi- 
cienne” between Acre and Tyre. I hope very soon to be able to send 
both of these ships to your flag, and I shall, ere long, get back to my own 
ship; but though somewhat inconvenient, I feel that this is my proper 
post for the present, and so I shall remain until the greater part of the 
Egyptians are out of Syria. 

I have, &c., 
~ (Signed) HOUSTON STEWART, 
Captain and Semor Officer on the Coast of Syria. 


bd 


Sub-Inclosure 16 in No. 175. 
General Jochmus to the Seraskier Ahmed Zacharias Pasha. 


Quartier-Général de Jérusalem, 
Excellence, Zine, LL a.m. 

J’AlI V’honneur d’informer votre Excellence que je suis arrivé ici hier 
au soir. Le Lieutenant-Général Hassan Pacha y était retourné également. 
hier de Chalil-Rachman ; et Sélim Pacha, avec la brigade de Chalid Pacha, 
y sera aujourd’hui, de maniére qu’il se trouvera ce soir réunie 4 Jérusalem 
une force de vingt-un bataillons, et dix-huit piéces d/artillerie. La 
cavalerie de Riza Pacha se réunira aujourd’hui au soir ou demain matin 
a celledu Murchardsou, qui doit étre arrivée hier au soir 4 El-Chalil. Les 
forces, aux points centraux ou elles se trouvent, devraient étre plus que 
suffisantes pour appuyer nos négociations avec Ibrahim, s’ils auraient eu 
lieu; mais comme celui-ci doit se trouver, d’aprés les dépositions de tous 
les déserteurs, au sud de la Mer Morte, il n’y a plus heu a négocier. Son 
armée est en complete déroute, faute de vivres par la prise de Maan, et 
les déserteurs déposent tous, que méme avant d’arriver aux magazins (4 
présent brilés), toute Vinfanterie subsistait depuis quatre ou six jours de 
la chair de chameau. J’ai trouvé ici le Baron Dumont, qui me confirme 
la compléte déroute des Egyptiens. Comme il a vu passer les trois pre- 
miéres colonnes a portée de fusil, et que dans la deuxiéme ou devrait se 
trouver, d’aprés toutes les informations, l’artillerie, il n’a vu qu'un grand 
nombre de chameaux et de mulets, on croit ici généralement qu’ Ibrahim 
a enterré ses canons dans le Désert. 

De son infanterie on n’a vu que la troisiéme colonne, réduite 4 5,000 
hommes; un corps isolé a Jufila de 2,000 hommes, qui se trouvaient il y 
a quelques jours avec Ibrahim Pacha vers Kerek: tout ce monde était a 
moitié mort de faim. Les pertes d’Ibrahim en hommes, en chevaux, et 
en bétes de somme, en repassant le Jordan, ont été trés-fortes. Enfin 
son Excellence Hassan Pacha, sur une nouvelle de la paix, a envoyé un 
sauf-conduit 4 Ahmed Ménikli Pacha, commandant la Cavalerie Egyp- 
tienne, et lui a fait savoir qu’il ne l’attaquerait pas dans sa retraite, 
pourvu qu’il ne vint pas fourrager dans les villages prés'de Chalil. Ahmed 
Ménikli Pacha, conduit par un officier.de Hassan Pacha, a alors choisi 
la route vers Gaza, dans sa retraite sur Egypte. La cavalerie, réduite a 
2,500 chevaux et 700 cavaliers démontés, était dans le plus misérable 


280 


état; et sans la Convention, deux bataillons dans les passes presque 
impraticables du Vadi-el-Ghir, 4 une journée au sud de Chalil, auraient été 
suffisantes pour arréter cette colonne. I] me parait trés-nécessaire aux 
troupes venues vers Gaza de se retirer, afin qu’il n’y ait jamais plus de 
3,000 hommes a la fois dans cet endroit. Je prie votre Excellence de 
communiquer cette lettre 4 M. le Général Michell. 
Jai, &e., 
(Signé) A. JOCHMUS, 


LTieutenant-Général. 


P.S.—Il y a beaucoup d’orge a El-Chalil, et on y trouve d’autres pro- 
visions, mais il faut y envoyer du riz et du beurre. 


(Translation.) 


Head-Quarters, Jerusalem, 7280 11 a.m. 


anuary 22, 1841, 

I HAVE the honour to inform your Excellency that I arrived here 
yesterday evening. Lieutenant-General Hassan Pasha also returned here 
yesterday from Chalil-Rachman; and Selim Pasha, with the brigade of 
Chalid Pasha, will be here to-day, so that this evening a force of twenty- 
one battalions, and eighteen guns will be assembled at Jerusalem. The 
cavalry of Riza Pasha will this evening or to-morrow morning join that of 
the Murchardsou, who must have arrived yesterday evening at E]-Chalil. 
The forces, in the central positions in which they are, ought to be more 
than sufficient to support our negotiations with Ibrahim, if they should 
have taken place ; but as the latter must be, according to the statements 
of all the deserters, to the south of the Dead Sea, there is no longer any oc- 
casion for negotiation. His army is in complete disorder, for want of pro- 
visions, owing to the capture of Maan: and all the deserters state, that even 
before reaching the magazines (now burnt), the whole infantry subsisted 
for four or six days upon camel’s flesh. I found Baron Dumont here, who 
corroborates the complete defeat of the Egyptians. As he saw the three 
first columns pass within gun-shot, and as in the second where, according 
to all accounts, the artillery ought to have been, he only saw a great 
number of camels and mules, it is generally believed here that Ibrahim 
has buried his cannons in the desert. 

The third column only of his infantry was seen, reduced to 5,000 men; 
a separate body at Jufila of 2,000 men, who were some days since with 
Ibrahim Pasha near to Kerek: all these people were half dead with 
hunger. ‘The losses of Ibrahim in men, in horses, and in beasts of burden, 
in passing the Jordan, were very great. . Finally, his Excellency Hassan 
Pasha upon the news of peace, sent a safe conduct to Ahmed Menikli 
Pasha, commander of the Egyptian Cavalry, and gave him to understand 
that he would not attack him in his retreat, provided that he did not come 
to plunder the villages near to Chalil. Ahmed Menikli Pasha, conducted by 
an officer of Hassan Pasha, then chose the road towards Gaza in his 
retreat upon Egypt. The cavalry, reduced to 2,500 horses and 700 dis- 
mounted horsemen, was in the most miserable condition: and had it not 
been for the Convention, two battalions in the almost impracticable passes 
of the Vadi-el-Ghir, one day south of Chalil, would have been sufficient to 
stop that column. It appears to be very necessary for the troops coming 
towards Gaza to withdraw, in order that there may never be more than 
3,000 men at a time in this place. I request your Excellency to commu- 
nicate this letter to General Michell. 

. I have, &c., 

(Signed) A. JOCHMUS, 


Lieutenant-General. 


_, P.S.—There is plenty of barley at El-Chalil, and there are other pro- 
visions there, but rice and butter must be sent there. ~ 


a A 


281 


Sub-Inclosure 17 in No. AGS: 


Colonel Bridgeman to Admiral Stopford. 


British Head-Quarters, Jaffa, 
Sir, February 2, 1841. 


ON the 17th of January a letter was addressed to your Excellency by 
Brigadier-General Michell, (inclosing a despatch from Lieutenant-General 
Jochmus,) in which the operations against Gaza and their result, as well 
as General Michell’s observations thereon, will have placed your Ex- 
cellency in possession of the events which have taken place on this part 
of the coast to that date inclusive. Major Wilbraham, Lieutenant Loring, 
Royal Navy, and Hamid Bey, (whose departure hence for the head- 
quarters of [brahim Pasha was mentioned in General Michell’s letter,) 
after a long and fruitless expedition by the southern extremity of the Dead 
Sea, turned westward to Gaza, hoping there to obtain some accurate 
information of Ibrahim Pasha’s line of march; from thence Lieutenant 
Loring returned to this place on the 23d of January, bringing us infor- 
mation of the arrival there on the 22d January of Ahmed Pasha with the 
advanced guard of Ibrahim Pasha’s army. 

Major Wilbraham, on the same day, again left Gaza with Hamid Bey, 
for El-Khalil, from whence, on the 25th, he proceeded to the Pass of 
Suera, through which it was expected Ibrahim Pasha would retire to 
Gaza, accompanied by Hamid Bey and by Omar Pasha, and also by 
Captain Arbuthnot, Royal Navy, who having arrived in Syria on the 
2lst instant, had been sent on a similar mission to the head-quarters 
of Ibrahim Pasha, and had met with Major Wilbraham at El-Khalil. 

In order to satisfy ourselves of the good faith of the Egyptian 
Generals, and at the same time to afford them every possible assurance 
that the retreat of their army should be protected and favoured to the 
utmost of our power, (some slight distrust having been evinced by them 
in consequence of a movement of the Turkish troops at El-Khalil,) 
Captain Houston Stewart, accompanied by Lieutenant Loring, Colonel 
Rose, and Rechid Pasha, (Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson of the Royal 
Engineers having been also sent there two days previously, to place himself 
in communication with the commanding officer of the Egyptian force,) pro- 
ceeded on the 25th to Gaza, and arrived there early on that day. They 
were at the same time to urge the speedy evacuation of that place, and the 
retirement on the Egyptian frontier of the troops which were daily ar- 
riving. [ also instructed Colonel Rose, as soon as he should be provided 
with a sufficient Turkish escort, (taking with him an Egyptian officer 
of rank,) to proceed on the route by which Ibrahim Pasha would most 
probably approach Gaza, and secure him as far as possible from any act 
of aggression on the part of the Bedouin Arabs, and other irregular troops. 
I conceive it now to be my duty to mention to your Excellency, that 
notwithstanding Brigadier-General Michell and Captain Stewart, in their 
interviews with the Seraskier and Council after the receipt of the Con- 
vention, were under the full impression that all hostile movements would 
be forbidden, and that the retirement of the Egyptian troops would be 
permitted in all sincerity and good faith, it was ascertained by Captain 
Stewart in the course of a subsequent conversation with Rechid Pasha, 
that orders had been sent to General Jochmus to act upon [brahim 
Pasha’s line of march, and impede it as much as possible, abstaiming at 
the same time from any direct attack. ; 

The large force, however, concentrated at Gaza, had in the mean time 
considerably influenced Rechid Pasha, and he returned forthwith to 
Jaffa, arriving here on the 25th. On meeting me, (being of course aware 
that Captain Stewart had communicated to me his discovery of the 
orders which had been issued,) Rechid Pasha immediately put into 
my hands the very letter, as he assured me, which he had addressed 
to General Jochmus, but which he found had not been sent. I strongly 
protested in the Council at the course which had been adopted, and 
pointed out how surely the honour of ae British name and of the Turkish 

2 


282 


cause would have been compromised thereby, as being so directly at 
variance with the assurances which Captain Stewart, Colonel Rose, and 
Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson had made to the Egyptian Generals; and 
I then received the most positive assurances that no hostile movement 
should be made, and that every possible assistance should be given to the 
Egyptians. : 

I have no doubt, however, that the order in question was given under 
the impression that Ibrahim Pasha’s army had been almost entirely 
destroyed in the Desert, or was at all events ina completely disorganized. 
state, knowing as we do that instructions had been received from Con- 
stantinople, directing that in such case Ibrahim Pasha should be com- 
pelled to give up his guns and arms. 

I objected to certain movements of the Turkish troops, which, although 
not suggested with any hostile intention, might yet, I conceived, have 
induced suspicion and mistrust on the part of the Egyptians. 

To dissipate all feeling of the nature, and personally to reiterate 
assurances of their anxiety to assist and favour the retreat of the 
Egyptian army, Rechid Pasha returned on the 25th to Gaza. On the 
29th of January I received from Captain Stewart and Lieutenant-Colonel 
Alderson, a Note (of which a copy is inclosed,) which had passed between 
them and Ahmed Pasha and the other Egyptian Generals. Sub-Inclosure 
19 is the partial affirmation of this document by the Seraskier, Lieutenant- 
General Jochmus, and the Mustechar Effendi; and Sub-Inclosure 20 is the 
copy of my letter to Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson, transmitting it to him. 

Major Wilbraham and his companions ceased not in the meantime to 
prosecute their search, and were twenty-four hours in the desert without 
water: all their exertions were however fruitless, and it was not until the 
dlst of January, that Colonel Rose (in consequence of information ob- 
tained from some deserters of Ibrahim Pasha’s column) was enabled to 
ascertain his exact line of march. On the morning of that day, he came 
- up with Ibrahim Pasha about twenty miles from Gaza, on the route from 
the southern extremity of the Dead Sea, and having delivered to him a 
copy of Mehemet Ali’s instructions on the evacuation of Syria, accom- 
panied him to Gaza. 

This morning Colonel Rose, and a few hours afterwards Captain 
Stewart, returned to Jaffa, and the former officer has placed in my hands 
the inclosed translated copy of a Note addressed to the Seraskier by 
Ibrahim Pasha, with which the Seraskier has expressed himself as 
satisfied. 

From the report I have received, it would appear that the Egyptian 
force which has reached Gaza, amounted to about 15,000 infantry, and 
6,000 or 7,000 cavalry. Of the latter, six regiments of regular cavalry, 
which may amount to about 2,400 men, and 1,200 irregular cavalry have 
proceeded to El-Arish; and prior to Captain Stewart’s arrival at Gaza, 
2,000 infantry are stated to have retired in a similar direction. 

He is decidedly of opinion that the evacuation will take place without 
any unnecessary delay, and that within a fortnight, not an armed 
Egyptian will be left in Syria. Whilst the wind however remains in its 
present quarter, it will be impossible either to land the biscuit which the 
troops will require for their homeward march, or to embark the women, 
the sick, and the wounded. 

Colonel Rose having had some personal communication with Ibrahim 
Pasha, and being enabled to afford your Excellency any further informa- 
EO I have directed him to proceed in Her Majesty’s Steam Vessel 

Vesuvius” as the bearer of this despatch, and to proceed from Marmorice 
to Constantinople. I purpose proceeding to Gaza on the 5th instant. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) EK. H. BRIDGEMAN. 


Colonel Commanding. 


283 


Sub-Inclosure 18 in No. 175. 


Guarantee by Menikli Pasha, and the other Chief Officers of the Egyptian Army, 
at present encamped near Gaza. 


Gaza, January 28, 1841 
WE, the Undersigned, being assembled in council with Commodore 
Houston Stewart, Royal British Navy, and Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson, 
Royal Engineers, after the discussion which has taken place, have 
pledged ourselves, that his Highness Ibrahim Pasha will, on his arrival 
at Gaza, execute the orders of his Highness Mehemet Ali, the Viceroy of 
Egypt, for the evacuation of Syria, and that he will not make any move- 
ment whatever against those orders, for all of which we give our signa- 
tures and affix our seals. : 
' (Signed) (L.S.) AHMED MENIKLI, 
General of Division. 
KOURCHID, 
General of Division. 
SELIM, 
General of Division. 
AHMED DRAMALY, 
General of Division. 
ISHMAEL, 
General of Brigade. 
IBRAHIM, 
General of Brigade. 
MAHMOUD BEY, 
Captain of the Navy. 


Captain Houston Stewart and Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson to Menikli Ahmed 
Pasha and the other Chief Officers of the Egyptian Army at present 
encamped near Gaza. ~ 


Gaza, January 28, 1841. 

IN consequence of the written guarantee which you have now given 

us, making yourself responsible that his Excellency Ibrahim Pasha, as 
well as yourselves, will implicitly obey, and forthwith carry into effect 
with perfect good faith, the orders of his Excellency Mehemet Ali Pasha 
for the evacuation of Syria by the whole of the Egyptian Army: We, 
Houston Stewart, Captain of Her Britannic Majesty’s ship “Benbow,” 
and Senior Naval Officer on the coast of Syria, and Lieutenant-Colonel 
Ralph Carr Alderson, Royal Engineers, representing here the united 
forces of Great Britaim, do pledge ourselves that no molestation nor any 
obstacle be put in the way of such evacuation, and that you are perfectly 
safe in diminishing your forces here as fast as possible; and, further, that 
provided you continue to make that diminution to the satisfaction of the 
said Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson, we promise to insist with his Excellency 
the Seraskier, Zacharias Pasha, Commanding in Chief the Ottoman 
forces, that no advance shall be made by the Turkish troops now 
at Megdill, nor Governor be sent to Gaza, until Colonel Alderson shall 
have reported the evacuation complete; and we promise, that if the 
Turkish authorities refuse to ratify and accept any one of these condi- 
tions, we will immediately, and in perfect honourable faith, give you 


notice thereof. 
(Signed) HOUSTON STEWART. 
R. C. ALDERSON. 


284 


Sub-Inclosure 19 in No. 175. 


Guarantee by the Seraskier, the Moustechar Effendi, and Lieutenant-General 
Jochmus. 


WE, the Undersigned, upon the received declaration of his Excellency 
Menikli Ahmed Pasha and the other Egyptian Generals and Officers, to 
carry forthwith into execution the entire evacuation of Syria and the 
Desert, consent and promise faithfully to abstain from any hostile move- 
ment, according to the promise given by Commodore Stewart and Colonel 
Alderson, with the proviso that the forces at present near and at Gaza 
march on El-Arish within seven days from this, embarking such men in 
transports as are sick, unfit for campaign, and unable to march according 
to Colonel Alderson’s judgment, and provided no movement is made by 
any Egyptian force at Gaza, east or northward. 

_” Given under our hand and seal at the Imperial Head-Quarters of 
Jaffa, January 30, 1841. 
(L.S.) MOUSTECHAR EFFENDI, Seraskier. 
JOCHMUS, Lieutenant-General. 


Sub-Inclosure 20 in No. 175. 
Colonel Bridgeman to Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson, 


British Head- Quarters, Jaffa, 
Sir, January 31, 1841, 3 o’Clock, P.M. 

YOUR letter of the 28th instant, inclosing the documents which 
Captain Stewart and yourself have executed with the General and other 
Officers of the Egyptian army, in which mutual assurances and pledges 
of good faith in the execution of the Convention are exchanged, was 
received by me yesterday evening soon after seven o'clock. 

I most fully concur therein, and have lost no time in communicating 
with the Seraskier. From ten o’clock this morning until this hour, I have 
been occupied in discussions and deliberations. The Seraskier Pasha, 
Jochmus Pasha, Houssein Pasha, the Moustechar Effendi, and Eyub 
Pasha, assisted at the Council, and the result thereof is appended by them 
to the Official Note which is inclosed. 

They all profess most earnestly their sincere wish and desire to carry 
through the Convention in all sincerity and good faith, and most posi- 
tively assure me, that no hostile movement or oppression shall be made 
on their part. 

T'wo regiments of cavalry are ordered to Ashdod as a connecting 
link between this place and Megdill; it had been their intention to send 
four regiments there, especially, as they assured me, to enable them to 
provide forage for their horses; but on my urgent request that only 
two regiments (to which I had previously assented) should be sent, the 
two extra regiments will be withheld. 

You will observe by the inclosed Note signed by the Seraskier Pasha, 
Jochmus Pasha, and the Moustechar Effendi, that they fix seven days for 
the total evacuation of Gaza by the troops now there. Similar indul- 
gence will be extended to any other force which may arrive, either under 
Ibrahim Pasha or other officers’ command. It will, therefore, be desirable 
that you should obtain from Ahmed Pasha and the other officers a 
written promise to carry the evacuation of Gaza into effect within 
that period; it would appear that ample time is thus given, as seven 
regiments of cavalry will already have proceeded to El-Arish. As 
regards the embarkation of the Egyptian infantry at Gaza, I have 
strongly urged it as a more immediate and speedy means of relieving 
the country from their presence; but their orders from Constantinople 
on this head, they say, are imperative, and they cannot assent to it ; 


285 


at the same time they are willing to give the most liberal construction 
to the embarking of sick, and, therefore, any of the infantry who may, in 
your opinion, be unfit to proceed by land, you are empowered to embark 
‘in the transports now at Gaza. It would be very desirable that the 
numerical force of combatants should be ascertained, and that a note 
should be made of such infantry as from physical causes you consider 
proper subjects to be transported by sea. By thus embarking every 
infantry soldier who may not be fit to march, and who could, therefore, 
delay the immediate retirement of that force, you will, I trust, be enabled 
to effect the evacuation of the Syrian territory within the stipulated 
time. I would beg that in tendering my respects to Ahmed Pasha, you 
will assure him that I am perfectly convinced of the good faith of the 
Turkish authorities, and that I shall not fail to watch over and secure, to 
a utmost of my power, the safety of the last man who may be left in 
yria. 
(Signed) E. H. BRIDGEMAN, 


Colonel Commanding. 


Sub-Inclosure 21 in No. 175. 


Ibrahim Pasha to the Seraskier. 
(Translation.) 
Your Highness, 

I AM going from Syria for Egypt. Your letter has reached me; the 
Egyptian troops are concentrating in Gaza, and when they have their 
necessary supplies, they will go immediately according to your wishes. 

I have written this to you in a friendly manner and have sent it to 
Your Highness. 

(Signed) IBRAHIM. 


Sub-Inclosure 22 in No. 175. 


Commodore Napier to Admiral Stopford. 


Her Majesty’s Ship “ Carysfort,” 
Sir, Alexandria, February 4, 1841. 

IN my letter to you of the 23rd of January, I informed you of the. 
arrival of Ibrahim Pasha at Gaza, which I find was a mistake; he 
marched with the rear-guard, and arrived at Gaza on the 31st. 

I received a private letter from Captain Stewart, dated the 25th of 
January, informing me that he was very apprehensive that the Turkish 
authorities would seize any opportunity to bring on a collision between 
the Turks and Egyptians, and in fact they had advanced, and skirmished 
with the outposts, and then made rather a precipitate retreat. 

I inclose copies of the letters I wrote to Captain Stewart, General 
Jochmus, and Colonel Bridgeman. 

Yesterday, I again heard from Captain Stewart, announcing the 
arrival of Ibrahim Pasha at Gaza, and his intention of immediately 
retiring into Egypt ; he had collected at Gaza 25,000 men, including about 
6,000 cavalry, in good order. This formidable force will, I have no 
doubt, keep the Turks quiet. | 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER, 


Commodore. 


286 
Sub-Inclosure 23 in No. 175. 


Commodore Napier to Captain Houston Stewart. 


Her Majesty’s Ship “* Carysfort,”’ 
Sir, Alexandria, February 2, 1841. 


I BEG to inclose you the copy of a Convention entered into by 
myself and the Egyptian Government, which Convention has been 
approved of by the British Government and the Allies, and I have been 
sent by Sir Robert Stopford to carry it into execution. 

I have authorized his Highness the Pasha to send frigates or trans- 
ports to Gaza, to embark any part of the Egyptian army he thinks fit, 
and it is my directions that you afford them every facility in your power 
to accomplish this, as well as to facilitate their retreat by land. 

You will call upon the Turkish authorities to support you in this, 
and should you find any impediment thrown in the way, you will, in the 
name of the Allied Powers, protest against it, in the most solemn manner, 
as contrary to the existing treaties, as contrary to the custom of civilized 
nations, as contrary to the laws of humanity, and contrary even to the 
interests of the Porte. 

The Syrian troops are not to be embarked against their own free will, 
but if you have any suspicion that General Jochmus will use them against 
the Egyptians, they had better be disarmed, or even allowed to go into 
Egypt, in fact do anything to avoid a collision. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER, 


Commodore. 


P.S.—I have written this to avoid any misunderstanding, though my 
letter of the 11th of January, delivered to you by Lieutenant Loring, 
appears sufficiently explicit. The “Stromboli” is to be sent back 
immediately. 


Sub-Inclosure 24 in No. 175. 


Commodore Napier to Colonel Bridgeman. 


; Her Majesty's Ship ‘‘ Carysfort,” 
Sir, Alexandria, February 2, 1841. 
CAPTAIN STEWART will show you the Convention entered into 
between the Egyptian Government and myself. I have written to him on 
the subject, and I consider it my duty to'call upon you, in your quality of 
Commander of the British forces in Syria, to do everything in your power 
to prevent any collision between the Turkish and Egyptian armies. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER, 


Commodore. 


Sub-Inclosure 25 in No. 175. 
Commodore Napier to General Jochmus. 


Es Her Majesty’s Ship “‘ Carysfort,” 
Ir, Alexandria, February 2, 1841. 

___ I HAVE the honour of inclosing you a copy of a Convention entered 
into by myself and the Egyptian Government, which has been approved 
by the Allies, and I have been sent to see it carried into execution. 

I send you this Convention, because I understand the Turkish 
authorities (notwithstanding my letter to you of the 11th of January, ° 
sent by Lieutenant Loring) have put difficulties in the way of danmettte 


it into execution, and have even medi 
Ai | meditated an attack on the Egyptian 


I have authorized Mehemet Ali to send frigates or transports to 
Gaza, to embark any portion of the Egyptian army he sees fit, and I have 
directed Captain Stewart to give them every facility, and I call upon your 
Excellency, in the name of the Allied Powers, to desist from any hostile 
measures. 

Relative to the question of the Syrians, I have directed Captain 
Stewart not to embark them against their will. 

Should the Turkish authorities (at the head of which, I believe, you 
are) impede in any way the return of the Egyptian army, I have directed 
Captain Stewart, in the name of the Allies, to protest against it in the 
most solemn manner, as contrary to the custom of civilized nations, as 
contrary to the existing treaties, as contrary to the laws of humanity, and 
contrary even to the interests of the Porte. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER, 


Commodore. 


Sub-Inclosure 26 in No. 175. 


Captain Houston Stewart to Hussein Pasha Effendi. 


British Head Quarters, 
Excellency, Jaffa, February 6, 1841. 
I HAVE just been informed that your Excellency has sent a hand- 
some sabre to my quarters. [ beg to assure your Excellency of the 
grateful sense [ entertain of the honour and compliment intended, but at 
the same time most respectfully to inform your Excellency, that the regu- 
lations of our service strictly prohibit its officers from accepting any 
presents from a Foreign Government, unless such present be transmitted 
through the Admiral Commanding in Chief, and be accompanied by his 
sanction. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) HOUSTON STEWART, 
Captain of Her Majesty’s Ship ‘‘ Benbow,” 
and Senor Officer on the Coast of Syria. 


Sub-Inclosure 27 in No. 175. 
Colonel Bridgeman to Admiral Stopford. 


British Head Qvarters, 
Sir, Jaffa, February 16, 1841. 
_CAPTAIN HENDERSON, of Her Majesty’s steam vessel “ Vesuvius,” 
having left Jaffa this day with a detachment of the Royal Artillery, for 
Beyrout, and his return to the coast of Syria being, I believe, uncertain, 
may I be permitted to express to your Excellency how extremely indebted 
I am (as commanding the British forces in this country) to him for the 
extreme kindness, zeal, and activity which he has at all times. evinced, 
whilst employed in the conveyance of officers and men, to: and from 
various parts of the coast. It is impossible to say how very much 
indebted we all are to him for his personal kindness and attention ; and in 
bearing testimony to the manner in which he has carried on, and on every 
occasion expedited, the public service, I am only venturing to make 
known to your Excellency those sentiments which the late Brigadier- 
General Michell would, I well know, have felt. it his most. pleasing duty 
to express. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) EK. H.EBRIDGEMAN, 
Colonel commanding the British 
Forces im Syria. 


a 


ey Tee Te ee a eT ee Pe ee ee ee fe RP a, eee Re 


-288 


Sub-Inclosure 28 in No. 175. © 


General Jochmus to Admiral Stopford. 


Head-Quarters, Jaffa, 
Sir, January 13, 1841. 


INTRUSTED by the Imperial Firman of the end of the Ramazan 
with the operations of the army since the 16th of December, I immediately 
resolved to assume the offensive against Ibrahim Pasha, who had concen- 
trated his forces at Damascus, since the end of November, reduced, 
however, from 20,000 to 24,000 regular infantry, 5,000 to 6,000 regular 
cavalry, 150 or more pieces of partly disorganized artillery, besides 4,000 
irregular Koordish and Annadi horse, and as many Albanians and other 
irregular infantry. 

The Turkish and Allied forces consisted at that period of 15,000 
infantry, and 150 cavalry, and 30 pieces of artillery, exclusive of the 
garrison of Acre, which, reduced to four battalions and a detachment of 
British marines, was destined to remain at that point. The Emir Bechir 
maintained still in pay a corps of 3,000 mountaineers, infantry, and 500 
cavalry. 

Such was the strength of the forces when, after the necessary pre- 
liminary arrangements, | transferred my head-quarters from Beyrout to 
Hasbeya, where I arrived on the 22nd of December, and without loss of 
time, ordered the levée en masse of the population of Lebanon, and of the 
whole of Syria south of the line of Beyrout, Balbeck, and Damascus, 
including the warlike tribes of the Haouran. I had sent my Aide-de- 
Camp, Captain De L’Or, to direct the operations against Damascus, and 
Count Szechenyi of the Austrian service, to command the Bedouin tribes 
on the left bank of the Jordan, south of the Lake of Tiberias. Both 
these officers executed the arduous and perilous tasks with brilliant 
courage and devotion. 

From the best and most authentic information that could be obtained, 
it was evident that Ibrahim Pasha, towards the latter part of the month 
of December, had resolved to maintain himself as long as possible in 
Damascus, in hopes of a speedy settlement of the Egyptian Question, and 
a pacific arrangement that might enable him to withdraw his shattered 
forces from Syria. 

The fact of the “Carysfort” frigate being in the harbour of Alexandria, 
and the nature of the news from Europe which Ibrahim Pasha obtained 
from friendly agents in Beyrout, Sidon, and other  sea-ports, afforded 
him unquestionably strong reasons to hold out to the last. On the other 
hand, should circumstances force him to retire (since violent remon- 
strances, visited on their authors in some instances by capital punishment, 
had been addressed by many or most of his officers against the retreat 
through the Desert), the Pasha had resolved to march by El-Mezerib, 

‘the bridge of Maajuma on the Jordan, Djenin, Ramla, and Gaza to 
El-Arish. ; 

_ The most positive and well-corroborated news had been obtained on 
this head from Damascus, and the fact was placed beyond a doubt when 
Mehemet Ali had obtained not only the authority from the British naval 
Commander-in-Chief to embark the sick, wounded, and women (who alone 
amount to upwards of 10,000), at or near Gaza; but had actually sent 
from El-Arish a cavalry division of 3,000 men, who encamped on the 
borders of the Desert, three quarters of an hour south of Gaza. _ 

Under such circumstances, I considered it a most positive duty on 
my part to defeat the intention of the Egyptian Commander; first, by 
obliging him to quit Damascus, and secondly, by forcing him to take the 
route of the Desert; for if a Convention had actually been signed. while 
Ibrahim Pasha remained at Damascus, the military question remained 
undecided, and the complete conquest of Syria by the Allied arms could 
be denied upon the ground of our Supposed inability of driving a much 
superior force from its capital; while, if the Egyptian army made forcibly 


289 


its way through Palestiné on El-Arish, its losses and sufferings would be 
small, the country being rich in every resource, and large Government 
stores existing still at Safed, Tiberias, Ramla, and Gaza. 

I have the honour to transmit to your Excellency annexed the plan 
of operations contained in my despatch to Lieutenant-General Selim 
Pasha, Governor of St. Jean d’Acre, then Kaimakam of Syria, in the 
absence of his Excellency the Seraskier Zacharias Pasha, who was still in 
the north of Syria. 

- Your Excellency will perceive that the general outline of this 
plan was to concentrate the whole of the regular forces towards the 
defiles formed by Mount Carmel and the mountains of Naplouse 
by a march along the coast, while all the irregular forces from the 
Lebanon, &c., &c., moving parallel to the Egyptian army along the right 
bank of the Jordan and the lakes of Hule and Tiberias, not only 
covered the magazines at Safed and Tiberias, but were constantly in a 
position for close observation, covering Syria against large foraging 
detachments, and remaining at the same time disposable for a concentric 
movement on the defiles of Djenin, where I calculated to unite 25 batta- 
lions with 30 pieces of artillery, and a mountaineer force of from 10,000 
to 12,000 men, and to fight decidedly a general action on ground quite 
impracticable for the enemy’s cavalry. It was at the time, and it 
remains still, my firm conviction, that victory would have crowned the 
Sultan’s arms in a few hours, and that the whole of Ibrahim Pasha’s 
army would have been annihilated or obliged to surrender; the only 
force of his, still in some state like organization, being his cavalry, and 
this would have been of no use to him in the rocky grounds of Djenin. 

The appeal to arms in the Sultan’s name was cheerfully followed by 
the mountaineer population of the Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon, obeying 
Prince Kassim Emir Bechir; by the men of Bellad Bascharra and Safed 
under their Mussellims, Hamid El Bey, Hussein Selman, and Seid Abdul 
Ali; by the Emirs of Rasbeya and Hasbeya, and the cavalry of Balbeck 
under the Emirs Handjar, Achmet, and Chalib Arrian. 

The powerful house of Abdel-Al, Governors of Naplouse, called to 
the standards the Mussulman population of their districts, and of Djebel 
Kods; and the Bedouin tribes of. Kura, Adjelun, and Es-Salt, prepared 
for booty when the hour for pursuing the enemy should have come, for 
these latter will not face an armed force, but are terrible to a flying foe. 

On the 27th of December the Haouran population appeared already in 
masses round El-Mezerib, and Kaftan Agassi, the Egyptian Commander 
of the Hennedy Cavalry and Moghribins, who had occupied that 
important post to protect the stores, collected there since two months, 
was obliged to fall back near to Damascus, leaving all the provisions and 
forage in the hands of our partisans, who appeared in strong bodies on 
Tbrahim’s last line of communication with Egypt. 

Since the 24th of December, the cavalry of Balbeck had thrown back 
the outposts of Ibrahim Pasha into the very gardens of Damascus, 
maintaining themselves afterwards at one or two hours from the gates of 
the town, and thus facilitating the desertion of the enemy. Upwards of 
100 officers and 800 men of the regular troops had presented themselves 
at our outposts up to the 28th of December, many bringing with them 
both horses and arms, and offering themselves for immediate service in 
the Imperial army. 

Justly alarmed at the imminent danger of his military position in the 
centre of a general insurrectionary movement, with an army in utter 
destitution and deserting in all directions ; blocked up within the walls of 
a large and disaffected town, ready for revolt, and with the enemy at its 
gates; unable at the same time to depend upon his troops, the major part 
of which might join the inhabitants against their General ;—Ibrahim Pasha 
at last gave way to the force of unlucky circumstances, and, selling the 
stores he could not carry away, and destroying a great part of his ammu- 
nition, he began his retreat on the 29th of December in the afternoon, 
encamping in the gardens of Damascus, and continued his march on the 
30th as far as El Ressone, three hours from the latter city. 

On the 3lst of December, an advanced guard of 1,000 Druses and 


Pi sg 


——EEEoeroeoee 


290 


2,000 Balbeck Cavalry entered Damascus, to establish the autho- 
rity of the Sultan; but the cavalry, in accordance with my positive 
orders to Captain De l’Or, started soon after to pursue the Egyptians in 
their route towards Mezerib, where Ibrahim’s army arrived on the 2nd 
and 38rd of January, 1841, after a loss, by desertion, killed, and dead from 
the cold, of upwards of 10,000 men and 20 guns. | 

The hail and intense cold caused numerous deaths among the nearly- 
naked soldiery in summer clothing, and the sword of the fierce and 
revengeful Haouranees, the victims of Ibrahim’s abominable oppression, 
was unmerciful to small detachments or straggling deserters. 

The bivouacs of the Egyptian army and the whole line of march 
resemble a wide field of battle, from the dead bodies of men and animals, 
such of the latter as could not keep up being immediately shot, by order 
of the Pasha. 

Ibrahim Pasha’s march was followed in a parallel direction by the 
forces of the Emir Bechir, to whom I had given the Command-in-Chief of 
all the light troops, and who, departing from Al-Klias and Zachlé, 
marched by Merdje Adjun and Safed on Tiberias, reinforced, at each 
station to the south, by the different detachments of volunteers who had - 
been directed to assemble along the banks of the Jordan. 

The Balbeck Cavalry having also come to Tiberias from its pursuit 
of the enemy in the direction of Mezerib, the Emir Bechir found himself 
on the 4th and 5th of January at the head of 1,000 infantry and 1,500 
horse, in and near Tiberias, while the defile of Djenin was occupied by a 
body of Albanians and Naplousians, supported by a strong force of the 
latter at six hours’ distance at Naplouse, ready to move at a moment’s notice. 

Nineteen battalions of the regular army having been concentrated at 
Acre since the 5th of January, marched on that day, and on the 6th, from 
that place in the direction of Jaffa; and, with the eight battalions already 
in Palestine at Jerusalem and Ramla, were in position to arrive at 
Djenin long before the enemy. 

My own head-quarters had been transferred successively on the 31st of 
December from Hasbeya to Safed, thence, on the 3rd, to the Djesr Madjuma, 
on the 4th to Djenin, on the 5th to Naplouse, and on the 6th to Jerusalem. 

Ibrahim Pasha remained three days irresolute at El!-Mezerib, recon- 
noitring Feik and the Jordan; but, informed or calculating on the cer- 
tainty of a general action, if he persisted in his intended movement on 
Djenin, he pushed his advanced guard on the 4th on Remtha; thus 
declaring his movement and indicating that he had changed his plans. 

He was followed thither by all his forces and his trains on the 5thand 6th. 

On this latter day his rear-guard was attacked in Remtha, by the 
cavalry of Chalib Arrian, who had gone again over the Jordan from 
Tiberias on the 5th instant. On the 7th, a skirmish took place near 
Djaraseh with the partisans of Count Szechenyi. On the 9th, the rear- 
guard of Ibrahim, sending out a foraging party, with some artillery, 
towards Es-Salt, the latter was repulsed in the defiles. 

The Egyptian army, fairly launched into the desert, has not since been 
authentically heard of; when last seen, between the El-Mezerib and Kalat 
Mefrek, its infantry was reduced to 15,000 disorderly men; its artillery, 
though still numerous, was utterly disorganised, principally by desertion; 
infantry soldiers serving the guns; the cavalry alone was in something 
like discipline. 

After four months’ campaign, a powerful army of 65,000 regular 
troops has thus been reduced. to scarcely two incomplete divisions. The 
valour of the Imperial and Allied troops has done much in the conquest 
ofa vast country like Syria in a short period of glory and success; but 
Providence has evidently visited the sins of tyranny and unparalleled 
oppression on the heads of Mehemet Ali and Tbrahim Pasha, and has 
given a new and terrible lesson, that if revolt and armed rebellion against 
the legitimate Sovereign are events unfortunately frequent in history 
they lead finally, but through heavy misfortune, to the wiser order of 
things, which intrusts the direction of Empires to those in whose hands 
command has been vested from their birth. 

The God of Battle may lead Ibrahim and his shattered forces through 


291 


the Desert, and bring some troops back to the banks of the Nile. I have 
taken, asin duty bound, such means as may as much as possible delay his 
march, or diminish his chances of escape. 

On the 6th of January, from Jerusalem, Iordered by twelve firmans the 
general insurrection of the Bedouin tribes of the Desert, and giving them 
as a reward all the Miri or Government tithes of produce, collected at 
Maan, the great central depét of the Desert, provided they would remove 
them and others out of the way of Ibrahim Pasha’s line of march,—I en- 
trusted the command of this expedition to the Sheik Abdul Rahman, the 
renowned Chief of Djebel Chalil, the personal and for ten years the un- 
vanquished enemy of Ibrahim Pasha. This expedition of 2,000 Bedouin 
horse was accompanied by my Aide-de-camp Baron Dumont, of the Aus- 
trian service, an officer of talent and resolution, and by Hadgi Hafiz 
Bey, the son of the Governor Osman Aga of Jerusalem. 

_ My next reports will inform your Excellency of the issue of this 
enterprise. 

It is to me an agreeable duty to state to your Excellency the perfect 
unanimity which has actuated all the officers and men of the Turkish and 
Allied forces, during these late and extensive operations, which by mere 
strategic combinations and movements, and with very little loss of life, 
have produced great and important results; the clear proof of Ibrahim’s © 
having lost Syria by mere force of arms, and without negotiations, the 
- salvation of Palestine from pillage and destruction, and finally, the enor- 
mous loss of the Egyptian General, only as far as El-Mezerib, since he 
left Damascus, without calculating those reserved for him by the suffer- 
ings of the Desert. 

To Brigadier-General Michell and Commodore Houston Stewart, of 
Her Britannic Majesty’s service, I have to offer my most grateful acknow- 
ledgments for their zealous and active co-operation. To their Excel- 
lencies Lieutenants-General Selim and Hassan Pashas, to his Excel- 
lency the Moustechar Mahommed Selim Effendi, to Omar Pasha, and to 
the other General and Field officers of the army, as well as to their 
gallant and hardy troops, I have to express my sincerest thanks. My 
Aide-de-camp Captain Bovill has with great activity and intelligence per- 
formed the duties of the Quarter-Master-General’s department of two 
divisions. Lieutenant-Colonel Tahir Bey, and Major Herman of Her 
Majesty’s service (attached to my staff), have in the execution of my 
orders displayed both zeal and ability. But no services could be more 
essential than those rendered by Mr. Wood, who, with unabating zeal and 
activity, and with an admirable degree of management, has obtained the 

rompt execution of my orders to the mountain chiefs, who, accustomed 
hitherto to the mere surveillance and defence of their special districts, 
have for the first time in modern Syrian history been brought to act in 
perfect accordance for one general and great object, and who have for 
this purpose, without pay and often without regular rations, gone for many 
days’ marches beyond the frontiers of their proper command ; a remarkable 
and isolated fact due to the personal influence of Mr. Wood, and as much to 
the devotion displayed by those chiefs to their legitimate master. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) A. JOCHMUS, 


Lieutenant-General commanding the Army of Operations. 


2P 2 


292 


Sub-Inclosure 29 in No. 175. 
Army of Southern Syria. 


His Excellency Ahmed Zacharias Pasha, His Excellency Sir Robert Stopford, G.C.B., 
Seraskier of Syria, Governor-General. Commander-in-chief by sea and land. 


His Excellency Lieutenant-General Jochmus Pasha, 
Commanding the Army of Operations. 
His Excellency Lieutenant-General Mehemed Rechid Pasha, 
Chief of the General Staff. 


His Excellency Lieutenant-General Selim Pasha, His Excellency Lieut.-General Hassan Pasha, 


Commanding the 1st Division. Commanding 2nd Division. 
Chalid Pasha, commanding Ist Brigade. Ismael Pasha, commanding lst Brigade. 
Ali Pasha, commanding 2nd Brigade. Emir Pasha, commanding 2nd Brigade. 
Riza Pasha, commanding the Regular and 
Omer Pasha, General of Brigade on the Staff. Irregular Cavalry. 


His Excellency Prince Kasim, Emir Bechir, 
Commanding the Irregular Forces. 


Regular Forces. Irregular Forces and Levies. 
Men. Infantry. Cavalry. 
Corps of Operation - - - 15,000 Troops of the Emir Bechir 3,000 500 
Garrison of Acre = - - 3,000 Emirs of Hasbeya and 
Garrisons of Saida and Beyrout - 1,000 Rasbeya - - - 1,000 200 
Cavalry—Lancers’— - - - 150 Other Chieftains, excluding ) 
Tatars - - : - 450 Naplouse_ - - 6,000 1,500 
Field Artillery, 30 pieces - ° 500 
20,100 10,000 2,200 
British Marines and Artillery at Acre and Austrian Marines at Beyrout 2 200 
Jaffa - - - - - 300 


Djenin, January 5, 1841. 


Sub-Inclosure 30 in No. 175. 


Egyptian Army in Syria. 


His Excellency Ibrahim Pasha, 
Commander-in- Chief. 


His Excellency Lieut.-General Solyman Pasha, His Excellency Lt.-Gen. Ahmed Menikli Pasha, 


o 


Chief of the General Staff. Commanding a Division. 
His Excellency Lieut.-General Kourschid Pasha, His Excellency Lieut.-General Osman Pasha, 
Commanding a Division. Commanding a Division. 
Major-General Ahmed Pasha Dramanli, Major-General Hassan Pasha, 
Commanding the Cavalry. Commanding a Brigade of Light Troops. 


Return of Forces on the 29th December, 1840, on leaving the Camp at Damascus. 


Irregular Troops. 


Wider § oe eAnnadi 
REMARKS. Infantry. | Artillery. | Cavalry. Albanian) Chen 
Infantry. Horse. Horse. 
22,000 5,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 
Lossfrom Dec. 29, 1840, 
to Jan. 3, 1841 . 7,000 None. None. 2,000 None. 
Forces present at E]- 
Wezertbmesuemrs 15,000 5,000 2,000 None. 2,000 


Djenin, January 5, 1841. 


293: 


Sub-Inclosure 31 in No. 175. 
Lieutenant-General Jochmus to Lieutenant-General Selim Pasha. 


Sir, 


Zilkade 1, 1256 
Hasbeya, December 25, 1340° 


I HAVE the honour to inform your Excellency that I have directed 
the Emir Bechir Kasim, Emir Standyar of Balbeck, Ahmed Aga-el-Jussuf, 
and the Emir of the Rasbeya and Hasbeya to follow Ibrahim Pasha with 
their cavalry and infantry, the moment he leaves Damascus; I have also 
written this order to Sheik Mahmoud of the Haouran, and to the Bedouin 
Sheiks of Kusa, Adjelun, Essyatt, and others. These latter will come to 
Elckizerib and Feik; the moment Ibrahim tries to pass Dejsr Madjuma, 
all these light troops will continually attack and harass the Egyptian 
army by day and by night, and in this way they will create great dis- 
order, and give occasion to the soldiers to desert, and to the muleteers to 
escape with their mules and camels, and leave Ibrahim without means to 
transport his guns and provisions. I beg now that your Excellency will 
give similar orders immediately in your Pashalic to the same effect, and 
order Seid Abdul Ali to collect all his people at Djesr Jakub, the castle 
of Safed and Djesr Madjuma. Your Excellency will hereby see how 
necessary it is to send to Safed the four guns of Seid Abdul Ali, and the 
100 boxes of ammunition, and 2,500 flints, and 2,000 okes of rice from 
Acre, together with 10,000 okes of biscuit, if the 20,000 okes are arrived 
from Beyrout. 

It is also very important that your Excellency orders immediately 
the people of Belled Harté and those of Djebel Nablous to be ready to fall 
upon Ibrahim Pasha, when he passes by the road from Djesr Madjuma to 
Djenin and Kakim: as your Excellency has received many muskets, these 
may all or partly be distributed to the people of Djebel Nablous, and other 
warlike tribes near them, together with ammunition and flints; but I 
think it best only to do this when Ibrahim has actually left Darnascus, 
and not before. 

With all these people following and harassing Ibrahim, we may hope 
to do him great injury; and in the meantime, we shall assemble all the 
regular troops near Acre, and march by Mount Carmel towards Djenin, 
and defeat the enemy in a general action in the defiles, where his cavalry is 
of no use, and where we shall have all the mountaineers, besides our regu- 
lar infantry and artillery. 

But before this, I shall come to Acre and concert everything with 
your Excellency, and we shall go together and fight another action like 
that of Kalat Maidan, and, please God, the Sultan’s standard shall be 
victorious. 

I have written this to your Excellency in the greatest confidence. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) A. JOCHMUS, 


Lieutenant-General. 


Sib-Inclosure-32 in No. 175. 


General Jochmus to Admiral Stopford. 


Head-Quarters, Jaffa, 
Sir, January 17, 1841. 


I HAVE the honour to inform your Excellency, that on the 14th 
instant I directed a division of ten battalions of infantry, 1,800 irregular 
and Tatar horse, 150 regular cavalry, and 14 pieces of artillery, to 
march from Ramla towards Gaza. ; 

This latter village is abandoned by the enemy, who has a flying camp 
of 1,200 regular and 1,800 irregular horse, with eight pieces of horse 
artillery, at three quarters of an hour’s march south of Gaza, whence he 


294- 


draws his forage and provisions: but ravages, at the same time, the 
country, carrying off cattle and mules to a great extent from most of the 
villages south of Ramla. 

The object of my movement was the protection of these villages, but 
principally the destruction of the enemy’s provisions at Gaza, in case 
Ibrahim Pasha, distressed in the Desert, should have struck off south of the 
Dead Sea towards Gaza. 

On the 14th of January the division encamped at Ashdod; on the 15th 
it could only make a march of three hours to El-Meshdel on account of the 
incessant heavy rain, which poured down ever since it left Ramla. 

Towards the afternoon, a reconnoitring party of the enemy of 500 
horse approached the camp; but the Commanding Officer making a very 
silly manceuvre was taken in flank and rear by about 400 or 500 of our 
cavalry, who pursued him for two hours, taking between forty and fifty 
prisoners, and killing and wounding as many. Our loss was about four 
killed and twelve wounded. 

Hearing nothing positive about Ibrahim’s immediate approach, and 
the low country towards Gaza having become a complete marsh by the 
continued floods of rain up to the 16th in the evening, and the troops 
having been completely drenched day and night in the bivouacs, I 
suspended the movement, and sent the infantry and guns to Jaffa, 
advancing, at the same time, the cavalry detachments to the neighbour- 
hood of Ascalon and some villages towards the river of that name, with 
their head-quarters at El-Mesde, intending to resume the operations the 
moment the ground had become practicable; but on my arrival here, 
informed officially of the complete submission of Mehemet Ali Pasha, and 
the consequent cessation of the state of rebellion of his army, our troops 
have been ordered to cease offensive hostilities. His Excellency the Seras- 
kier Ahmed Zacharias Pasha commanded in person since we left Ramla. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) A. JOCHMUS, 
Lieutenant-General commanding the 
Army of Operations. 


Sub-Inclosure 33 in No. 175. 
General Jochmus to Admiral Stopford. 


Sir, Jaffa, January 20, 1841, 9 0’ Clock p.m. 


I HAVE this instant received from my Aide-de-camp Baron Dumont, 
the important news that the expedition of a corps of our light troops 
under his command, which left Jerusalem on the 9th instant, for Maan, 
has completely succeeded. Ibrahim Pasha, thinking his depét deep in the 
desert, completely safe, neglected to keep a sufficient garrison in the 
castle, which was only defended by four guns and a few men. Baron 
Dumont, after six forced marches, arrived at 10 o’clock p.m., on the 14th 
of January, near the place, and surprised it the next morning, just after 
the first column of Ibrahim’s troops had left it for Suez, and after 
inducing the people to evacuate the town, burnt the five large maga- 
zines which contained Ibrahim Pasha’s stores. The column which left 
Maan for Suez is chiefly composed of all the women, servants, &c., 
&c., with some troops of escort. The army itself, of which the 2d 
column was to sleep at Maan, on the 14th, seeing its provisions burnt, 
had been obliged to countermarch, and is now wandering in the desert, 
harassed on all sides by the Bedouin tribes. Its state seems to be dread- 
ful, and all over the country through which the Baron Dumont came back 
to Kerek, he saw the dead bodies of small detachments which had been cut 
off by the Bedouins. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) A. JOCHMUS, 
Lieutenant-General commanding the 
Army of Operations. 


LS a AS SS SD 


295 


Sub-Inclosure 34 in No. 175. 
Baron Dumont’s Report to General Jochmus of the Operations against Maan. 


(Translation.) Bivouac, Mountains between Kerek-el-Schoback and Maan, 
(Extract.) January 16, 1841,—8 o’Clock a.m. 


| HAVE the honour to inform your Excellency, that according to 
your orders, I left Jerusalem on the 9th instant, accompanied by Sheik 
Abdul Rahman, Habil Cherif, and Hadji Hafiz Bey, the son of the 
Governor of Jerusalem, with an escort of fifteen Arab horsemen. 

By five forced marches, of fifteen to eighteen hours per diem, I 
arrived near Maan, on the 14th instant, at 10 o’clock p.m., our detach- 
ment being then increased by the Sheik’s followers to 220 horsemen. I 
approached an Egyptian bivouac near Maan, to within 150 paces, there 
being no piquets, guards, or military precaution, and I found that I had 
| before me the first column of the Egyptian forces, escorting the women, 
harems, &c., &c. The escort consisted only of Hennedy irregular cavalry. 

My force not being sufficient to attack, I watched the column till 
daylight, when it continued its marches by the Suez caravan road, and I 
entered Maan two hours afterwards. It is a place consisting of about 
three hundred houses, with chemise of masonry. The magazines were 
in an old castle, defended by four old iron guns, and twenty Egyptian 
soldiers. These were killed by my horsemen before I could prevent it, as 
they were endeavouring to escape. After ordering the towns-people to 
quit, and communicating your Excellency’s orders and instructions to 
their Sheik, I saw the town evacuated in the space of twelve hours, sur- 
mounting the difficulties by money, and promises of presents. The 
magazines, five in number, I found to contain on inspection, 


150 Camel loads of barley, 
50 Ditto ditto prepared wheat. 
35 Ditto ditto rice. 


They were burnt at 3 o’clock in the night of the 14th, 15th January 
—the private property and stores of the inhabitants having been by that 
time removed to the mountains, and nothing left in the town. 

- I took the direction of Aneyi with Sheik Abdul Rahman, and on the 
15th at 7 o'clock, after sunrise, I perceived the second column of the 
Egyptian army, consisting only of about 1,200 camels, and a greater 
number of mules and other animals of burden, and an irregular cavalry 
escort, although I had received positive news that it was conducted by 
Solyman Pasha, and had with it the artillery. My horsemen had seized 
forty-four camels that belonged to the first column during the preceding 
night, and I found forty more dead on the road, or in the bivouac, consti- 
tuting a loss of eighty-four camels in one single night, by my party 
alone. 

The whole of the Arabs of the Desert are pursuing the Egyptian 
forces. 


Sub-Inclosure 35 in No. 175. 
General Jochmus to Admiral Stopford. 


Head-Quarters, Jerusalem, 
Sir, January 28, 1841, 8 o’Clock p.m. 


I HAD the honour to inform your Excellency, in my report of the 
17th instant, that in consequence of the official news of the submission of 
Mehemet Ali, hostilities had ceased on our part from that day, after 


296 


the arrival of Hamid Bey, the latter having written to the same purpose 
to the Egyptian General at Gaza, who received and answered his commu- 
nication on the 18th. No hostilities had been committed since the defeat 
of the Egyptian cavalry corps on the 15th instant at E1-Meshdel, and our 
cavalry had ever since maintained the positions which it occupied on the 
16th, when I advanced it along the course of the Ascalon river. 

By my directions a corps of eight battalions of infantry, and twelve 
pieces of artillery under Lieutenant-General Hassan Pasha, flanked from 
Jerusalem our movement towards El-Meshdel, observing by light cavalry 
the roads north and south of the Dead Sea, by which any Egyptian forces 
might arrive in Gaza. ; 

On the 14th a corps was reported to have crossed the Jordan and 
bivouacked (near Jericho) at Reyha. Hassan Pasha encamped at 
Abugosh, three hours south-west of Jerusalem, marched, towards the 
evening, on the 15th instant; but the Egyptian division hearing of 
his approach, immediately recrossed the Jordan with a heavy loss in 
drowned and killed, the waters of that river having risen more than a 
foot during the incessant rains of the 14th and 15th of January ; and 
the Arabs falling upon the troops during the passage, and in the nearly 
impracticable marshes of the valley at the head of the Dead Sea. 

The enemy’s column above-mentioned proved to be the shattered 
remains of the corps, called by Mehemet Ali “the Guards,” amounting 
to about 4,000 to 5,000 men, and two cavalry regiments with a battery of 
artillery, forming the rear-guard of the army under the personal com- 
mand of Ibrahim Pasha. The artillery and one of the regiments 
(Cuirassiers) had remained at some distance on the left bank of the river, 
and the movement was evidently a desperate attempt to march by any 
way on Gaza or E]-Arish. 

The forlorn situation of this corps will be seen from the two inclosed 
reports of Mehemed Rechid Pasha, Chief of the Staff, and of Riza Pasha, 
commanding the cavalry. I do not estimate the loss of the army so 
great as the latter, but certainly, after comparing all the reports, it 
amounts to 1,000 or more men, and eight pieces of artillery, which latter, 
although with the column at Es-Salt, were unquestionably not at Kerek 
on the 19th instant, whither Ibrahim had retired after continual 
skirmishes with the Arabs. The Governor of Jerusalem had sent his son, 
Hadgi Hafiz, to ascertain whether the artillery has been buried in the 
desert mountain or not. 

Such was the isolated position of this last corps of the Egyptian 
army, that its Commander-in-Chief had lost all means of communication 
with his remaining forces, and that, although Hamid Bey and the Com- 
missioners from Egypt were from the 19th to the 23rd at Ki-Chalil, trying 
by all means to establish a communication with Ibrahim, either by the 
north or the south of the Dead Sea, it proved a vain attempt, notwith- 
standing that, during the same days, the above column under the Pasha 
was at Kerek, surrounded by the Arabs of the country, who had been 
reinforced by the tribes of Beni Sackr and Beni Hennedy, arrived from 
the depth of the desert in consequence of the orders sent them from 
Jesusalem on the 8th of J anuary, through Baron Dumont. 3 

The distance from El-Mezerib to Kerek is, at the utmost, five days’ 
march. [brahim Pasha left the former place on the 6th or 7th of 
January, and after fifteen days was still at Kerek, having continually 
marched and counter-marched in the desert mountains in search of food, 
or from having been stopped in the mountain defiles. According to the 
statement of the son of the Chieftain of Abugosh, a Captain in the 
Guards, who deserted on the 21st instant from Kerek, and had been with 
the column ever since it quitted Damascus and El-Mezerib, Ibrahim 
marched from the latter place to Bilka, thence back north to Es-Salt, 
again south to Kerek and back to Jericho; obliged to recross the Jordan 
he for a second time returned to Kerek, having lost his guns, ammuni- 
tion, and stores, during the continued and very harassing attacks, day 
and night, of the Arab bands intent on plunder. 

My last reports from El-Chalil of the 28th of January (twenty-two 
days after Ibrahim’s leaving Kl-Mezerib, and thirty-one after his retreat 


297 


from Damascus) state that Hamid Bey, despairing of communicating with 
Ibrahim Pasha, had resolved to return to Gaza, and thence to Egypt. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) A. JOCHMUS, 


Lieutenant-General commanding the Army of Operations. 


Sub-Inclosure 36 in No. 175. 


Mehemed Rechid Pasha to General Jochmus. 


taf a 22 Zilkadé, 1256. 
Mon Général, Jenisalem,s le? Fyacesiette 


J’ARRIVE aJinstant de Reyha, ot jétais pour m’assurer moi-méme 
de ce qui se passait; en effet, Ibrahim y était hier au soir, et il était 
arrivé le Jeudi; il en est reparti le Vendredi 4 midi, 15 Janvier. J’ai 
vu a Reyha les bivouacs de l’ennemi. Le village a été bralé entiérement. 
J’ai vu plusieurs déserteurs, qui disent qu’Ibrahim avait sous ses ordres 
les ler et 2e régiment de sa garde, et un peu de cavalerie, et ses Gardes 
de Corps (Cehie honigi), Les troupes ennemies n’ont ni canons, ni 
munitions de guerre, ni des provisions de bouche. 

Je ne puis pas me rendre compte de ces mouvemens del’ennemi. J’ai 
réuni les officiers supérieurs chez Hassan Pacha, ot: nous avons fait venir 
quelques gens du pays qui connaissent les routes de Mecque, de Chalil, de 
Gaza, et de Maan. Alors, tant pour protéger Gaza que Chalil, ot il se 
trouve beaucoup de provisions, nous nous sommes décidés de nous 
rendre 4 Chalil demain de bon matin avec huit bataillons et les douze 
picces de canon. Si l’ennemi veut montrer sa figure, nous tacherons de 
lui apprendre de ne pas perdre une seconde fois sa route. Je vous feral 
Savoir aussitot que possible, s'il y a d’autres nouvelles. 


Je suis, &c., 
(Signé) MEHEMED RECHID. 


(Translation.) 
General Jerusalem, 22a 


I HAVE this moment arrived from Reyha, where I have been in 
order to ascertain in person what was going on: in fact, Ibrahim was 
there yesterday evening, and had arrived there on Thursday; he left again 
on Friday the 15th of January, at noon. I saw the bivouacs of the enemy 
at Reyha. The village has been completely burnt. J saw several 
deserters, who say that Ibrahim had under his orders the lst and 2nd 
Regiments of his Guards, and his body guard (Cehie honigi). The 
enemy’s troops have neither cannon, ammunition, nor provisions. I can- 
not account for these movements of the enemy. I have assembled the 
superior officers at Hassan Pasha’s, where we have caused some of the 
country-people to come who know the roads to Mecca, Chalil, Gaza, and 
Maan. ‘Then, in order to protect Gaza as well as Chalil, where there are 
a great many provisions, we decided upon proceeding to Chalil early 
to-morrow morning with eight battalions and the twelve pieces of cannon. 
If the enemy is disposed to show his face, we shall try to teach him not to 
lose his road a second time. I will let you know as soon as possible if 
there is any other news. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) MEHEMED RECHID, 


Sub-Inclosure 37 in No. 175. 


Report of the Riza Pasha (Commanding the Cavalry) at Jericho, to his Excellency 

| Lieutenant-General Hassan Pasha, at Jerusalem. 

(Translation) | Jericho, @ussesnaate 
ON. Thursday, 22d Zilkadé, (14th January, 1841,) Ibrahim Pasha 

arrived at Richa (Jericho), and called the old Sheik Solyman to him, want- 

ing from him barley, telling him, «If you find what I want, you will be 

safe; but if you do not, I shall cut off your head.” For this reason, the 


2Q 


298 


poor old Sheik showed him one or two wells full of barley, which [brahim 
took and distributed to his troops. After this, he set the town on fire, 
taking the sheep and other animals from the town and neighbourhood. 
Ibrahim remained there that night, and sent towards Jerusalem about 100 
horsemen, but on the road, these were informed that there were four or 
five Pashas with a large body of troops at Jerusalem. Upon hearing this 
news, the horsemen went back and infermed Ibrahim that it was impos- 
sible to advance, and that if they did so, they would be cut to pieces. 
Hereupon, he ordered all his troops to recross the river (Jordan), but 
while they were passing, the Arabs fell upon them, and many men were 
killed or drowned in the river; and most of the troops which got across, 
dispersed in the direction of the Damascus road, and Ibrahim, with the 
remainder, went to Kerek; but on the road he lost all his infantry, and 
arrived at Kerek with only cavalry. Ibrahim Pasha left some guns at 
Es-Salt. 
A true Translation. 
(Signed) Tauir Bey, 


Sub-Inclosure 38 in No. 175. 


General Jochmus to Admiral Stopford. 


Head Quarters, Jaffa, 
Sir, January 30, 1841. 


I HAVE the honour to inclose to your Excellency the terms granted 
by the Ottoman authorities for the entire evacuation of Syria. 

Since the arrival of Hamid Bey and the English Commissioner, 
Lieutenant Loring, Royal Navy, on the 17th instant, it has been deemed 
advisable, after a general Council held at these head-quarters, to come to 
the resolution on the part of the Imperial authorities, that no obstacle 
should be offered to the retreat of any Egyptian force south of the Dead 
Sea, but that any march north of that lake must be preceded by the sur- 
render of guns and arms, leaving it optional to embark any sick, wounded, 
and women, at Caiffa or Gaza. 

_ In order to impart the due consistency to this resolution, twenty-one 
battalions of infantry and eighteen pieces of artillery were concentrated 
at Jerusalem, and 2,000 cavalry at El-Chalil with reserves at Ramla. 

I had transferred my own head-quarters to Jerusalem, whence I re- 
turned yesterday ; Ibrahim Pasha having left Kerek and being far 
beyond the Dead Sea, but the Arabs of the Desert swarm round him 
on all sides, and I have not as yet been able to ascertain his present 
situation. 

Hamid Bey, Major Wilbraham, and Selim Bey (the Turkish Commis- 
sioner), after fruitless attempts to communicate with the Pasha, have 
returned to Gaza. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) A. JOCHMUS, 
Lieutenant-General commanding the Army of Operations. 


Sub-Inclosure 39 in No. 175. 
[See Sub-Inclosure 19 in No. 175.] 


Sub-Inclosure 40 in No. 175. 


General Jochmus to Admiral Stopford. 


Head-Quarters, Jaffa, 
Sir, February 2, 1841. 


I HAD the honour to inform your Excellency, in my despatch of the 
30th of January, that the Commissioners of England, Turkey, and Egypt 
not being able up to that day to communicate with Ibrahim Pasha, had 
returned to Gaza. Omar Pasha and Captain Arbuthnot, Royal Navy, 
sent on a similar errand, had been equally unsuccessful. 


299 


At last, on the 31st of January, intelligence was received at Gaza, 
that the Egyptian Commander-in-Chief was within a day’s march of that 
place, still pursued by the Arabs, who had not left him‘a moment’s quiet 
since his defeat near Jericho on the 15th ultimo. On the 31st he entered 
Gaza with the remains of the guards and some irregular troops to the 
following amount :— 

Three regiments of guards (infantry), 3,500 men. 

One regiment of cuirassiers, one ditto lancers, 600 horses. 
Irregular infantry, - - - 500 
Hennedy irregular horse - - 40 ,, 

This force was in a most deplorable state, having wandered in the 
mountains of the Desert in search of food for the last seventeen days 
since their recrossing the Jordan, Ibrahim being away from Damascus 
thirty-four days. Colonel Rose of Her Britannic Majesty’s service, who 
went to meet Ibrahim, told me that an oke, or two pounds and three- 
quarters, of mule or camel’s flesh, was sold at thirty to forty piastres, or 
eight shillings English, and that the Pasha’s own horses were without 
barley the last two days. The three regiments of guards on their leaving 
Damascus were 8,000 strong, and the two regiments of cavalry 1,200, 
making a loss of these corps alone, who were the élite of the army, of 
4,500 infantry and 600 cavalry. 

The different columns which from the 21st to the 25th of January 
had preceded the arrival of Ibrahim at Gaza were as follows :—Under 
Ahmed Menikli Pasha, regular cavalry, 2,400; irregular cavalry, 300: 
under Kourschid Pasha, under Dramanli and others, 11,000 infantry and 
irregulars, and 600 regular cavalry: which, with 4,640 men arrived under 
Ibrahim Pasha, and about 3,000 artillery and irregular troops, gone 
under Solyman and Ismael Pashas to Cairo, escorting the two convoys of 
artillery, and women, civil employés, and others, form a total of 22,000 
men; constituting, in conformity with my previous reports, a loss of 
18,000 men and forty-two guns since Ibrahim Pasha left Damascus with 
40,000 men and 150 guns. 

The inclosed general return will give to your Excellency a complete 
tableau of the enormous losses of the Egyptian army since the opening 
of the campaign, amounting to 63,000 men, 619 garrison guns, and 148 
field-pieces. 

The forces of Mehemet Ali in Syria have always been very much and 
purposely overrated. J have never estimated his actual army above 
75,000 effectives and 10,000 non-effectives, and the losses on the same 
scale: were it otherwise, the glory of the Sultan’s and Allied arms would 
only be enhanced; for at the opening of the campaign there were in the 
field, of regular forces about 9,000 men, at the period of the taking of 
Acre about 16,000 men,—and the army at present in Southern Syria 
amounting to 18,000 infantry, 3,500 regular cavalry, 3,000 irregular horse, 
and thirty pieces of field artillery. 

The enthusiasm of the gallant Syrian population for their legitimate 
Sovereign has done the rest. 

In the above estimates are not included the 3,200 horse and 600 
infantry and artillery forming the division of El-Arish, which arrived and 
encamped near Gaza during the month of December last. 

The sufferings of the remains of Ibrahim Pasha’s own army have 
been dreadful. Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson, in his reports from Gaza to 
Colonel Bridgeman, states that the infantry arriving from the Desert had 
been seven days nearly without any food, and full three days without , 
water ; and the two Turkish Staff Officers who served for three days as 
safe-guard to the cavalry columns of Ahmed Menikli Pasha, represent his 
force as in the most exhausted state. The loss of cavalry horses has at 
least been 2,000. Baron Dumont’s prisoners made before the 17th of 
January, had then already been living for four and six days upon camel’s 
flesh. The number of those who will be embarked at Gaza as hors de 
combat will be very great, and the whole matériel of the army being 
completely ruined, it cannot in its present state be considered anything 
but an armed mass, the only force that approaches to order being the 
cavalry. 


99 


2Q 2 


300 


The artillery, when last seen by Baron Dumont, after the taking of 
Maan, was not any longer transported by draught as it was when it left 
Damascus; but as many guns had been drawn by oxen, cows, and 
buffaloes, this column found the means of subsistence by killing these 
animals, and was thus enabled to continue its march by the route of 
Maan, while the other columns of the army, after the magazines of 
Maan had been emptied by the Bedouins and the remains burnt, were 
obliged to countermarch, and come back upon Gaza by isolated tracts, 
and completely destitute of all military array. _ 

The straight road from Maan to Cairo is about four days, every 
station having water for the wants of the large pilgrim caravans; the 
circuit by Gaza and El-Arish is twenty-three days through deserts, one- 
half of which is destitute of water. 

Without the Convention and the arrival of the Commissioners of 
Peace, the fate of the isolated columns of Ibrahim’s army could not have 
been doubted, arriving as it did at long intervals, and in isolated columns 
from each other, at nearly the very head-quarters of the Imperial army, 
ready to move at a moment’s notice. 

The final operations of this campaign are marked by two distinct 
features: after a forced retreat from Damascus, the Egyptian General was 
compelled at El-Mezerib to abandon his original intention of passing” 
through Palestine to El-Arish, on which line, according to the inclosed 
return, he would have found 2,797,775 rations for troops, and 271,980 
rations of forage. 

He was offered battle at Djenin and declined it, preferring the risk of 
a march through the Desert. 

The general insurrection of the Bedouins, and the destruction of the 
stores at Maan, obliged him a second time to change his route, falling 
from the caravan road into the heart of the wilderness. 

His artillery having gone by the prescribed line of march, the remains 
of his army, henceforth routed and isolated columns, without array, 
ammunition, or guns, without reciprocal communications, could have 
offered no effectual resistance against a general movement of the Turkish 
army, whose cavalry had come into line from the north, and its choice 
would have been surrender or starvation in the Desert. 

Such are the advantages of strategical combinations over mere 
fighting, that the effective loss of 18,000 men and the complete disor- 
ganization of the Egyptian army has not cost 100 men, hors de combat, 
to its antagonists. I have, -&c., 

(Signed) A. JOCHMUS, 


Lieutenant-General. 


Sub-Inclosure 41 in No. 175. 


RETURN oF Sores on the projected Egyptian Line of March through Palestine. 


Wheat Barley Prepd.Wheat Maize Butter Oil Olives Biscuit 
Magazines of p-ardeb. p.ardeb, p.ardeb. ‘p.ardeb. p.ardeb.  p. oke. p. oke. p. oke. 
‘Liberias and Safed.,.. 2,400 § 3,900, .J., [00 .. .2182 ..° 280 — == % oo —— eee 
Jattarand Loud ls 848 .. 2,633 .. — .. 1,737 .. 400 .. 1,249 .. 1,246 .. 22,000 
Ramla pepuieenic cet 3 SHO =, HS = & a 4, 15162 4, —.. 176... — = 
TIO sy 6,817 7,066 700 3,081 680 1,425 1,246 22,000 


N.B.—One ardeb is 105 okes. One oke is 22 pounds English weight. 


CALCULATION OF PRovISIONS AND FORAGE. 


Rations. 


Wheat, at $ an oke per ration............ 6,817 ardebs = 2,113,270 


Maize, at 1 oke per ration .............: 8,081 ,, — 342,505 { Besides oil, 
Wheat, prepared for ready use .......... 700 es — 217,000 ( butter, and olives, 
Biscuit at 5 an oke per ration.......... 22,000 okes — 44,000 


2,797,775 rations for Troops. 
Barley, above mentioned, at 33 okes p. ration 7,066 ardebs — 211,980 
at Djenin A es 2,000 _,, — 60,000 


271,980 rations of Forage. 
True Copy, Cartes Crurcuitt. Jaffa, January 20, 1841. 


GENERAL RETURN of the Lossrs of the EayeTrAN ARMY under 


Sub-inclosure 42 in No. 175. 


Maan and Gaza, or up to the 31st January, 1841, being the day of the arrival of IBRAHIM PACHA. 


His Excellency Isranim Pacua since the landing of the ALLIED Forces at Djuni, 10th September, 1840, to the evacuation of Syria via 


PERIODS. 


EFFECTIVE COMBATANTS. 


NON-COM- 
BATANTS. 


and 
Field Pieces. 


ARMY. 
Garrison 

Guns. 
85,0002 619» 
45,000° 603 
18,500 16° 
63,500 619 
21,500 None. 


GENERAL TOTAL. 


Guns 


TOTALS 
of 

[Field 
Pieces. 

cau ARMY. 
270° 
120° |Loss to 30th Dec. 1840. 

. |Loss since the retreat 

28 
from Damascus. 

148 |Total loss. 
122! |Remaining. 


REGULAR ARMY. IRREGULAR FORCES.| TOTAL Military Ad- 
ministration, 
eye ae: Ss Cavalry. Infantry. Cavalry. of Musicians, 
¢ Z oa =a Effective Military Ser- 
Effective aah Effective oie vants, Sick in 
Officers Rank| , Offers | | Officers and Ottcers | Combatants. | Hospital, 
nd File ances and | “Firelocks, | Lances an 
‘ . Sabres. Sabres. &es, &e. 
10th September, 1840 
Forces in Syria, under lpratist 58,000 7,000 5,000 5,000 75,000 10,000 
Pacha. 
Loss of Troops and Guns up to oll a, 
the concentration of the Forces at 34,000 2,000 3,000 1,000 40,000 5,000 
Damascus, December 1840. | 
Idem from the evacuation of Da- 
mascus to the evacution of Syria, 12,000 2,000 100 2,100 16,200 2,300 
31st January, 1841. . 
Total loss of the Army. 46,000 4,000 3,100 3,100 56,200 7,300 
Returning to Egypt by Ga 
pide 40 Baye’ Py Gale an) 518,000 © | “3,000 1,900 | 1,900 | 18,800 | 2700 
Maan. ; 
RECAPITULATION. 
Garrison Field 
Men. Guns. _ Pieces. 
Total Egyptian Force at the opening of the pa ree SEDs 1840 - 85,000 619 270 
Total loss to 31st January, 1814 - - - 63,500 619 141 
Ditto returning to Egypt by Maan and Gaza_ - - - - - 21,500 None 1228 


Of this latter Force only 12,000 Infantry, 3,000 Horse, 122 guns are of the Regular Army. 


This Return does not include the fresh Division come from E] Arish to the south of Gaza, in December last, 


and composed of from 1,000 to 1,200 Regular Cavalry 
A. J OCHMUS, 
Lieutenant- General. 


Head Quarters, Jaffa, 2nd February, 1841. 


y, 2,200 Irregular Cavalry, and 600 Infantry and Artillery. 
W. J. FREESTUN, 


Assistant Adjutant-General. 


f In case there were 
at Damascus, concen- 
trated, 250 Field Pieces, 
there remain 222 Field 
Guns, but this is highly 
improbable. 

The 100 Field Guns 
taken at Acre were 


4 Tt has been said that the Field 
Artillery at Damascus was 250, but 
this is exaggerated, as in general the 
Egyptian accounts have always been. 


€ Loss of Guns since leaving 
Damascus, 

Garrison Field 

Guns. Pieces. 


those lost at the battle 
of Nezib, 


Castle of Damascus 12 
Maan - 4 
From Damascus to El 


REMARKS. 


® These 85,000 men do not include mule- 
teers, camel-drivers, civil employés of the 
Government in Syria, their servants, women, 
harems, &c., &c. 
It may be estimated that from 15 to 16,000 
of these classes left Damascus at the retreat. 


> Distribution of Guns. 
Garrison Field 


Guns. Guns. 
Seida - = 2 20 
Beyrout = - 30 20 
North of Syria ae pas 
of the Taurus - ae 200 
Acre - - ae este) 100 
Castle of Damascus - 12 
Field Artillery concen- 
trated at Damascus - Se 1504 
Jerusalem - - - 20 
Jaffa - - - - 33 
Maan - - - 4 
Total...619 270 


eee 


© Distribution of loss up to the end of 
‘December 1840, 


‘Sent prisoners to Cyprus oat Con- \ 16,000 
stantinople - - 
‘Killed and dead - - = 4,000 


Be ott 
homes in Syria and Asia Minor 


Total «= 45,000 


Mezirib ~ sce 20 

From El Mezirib to 
Kerek - “ was 8 
Total = 16 28 


302 


Sub-Inclosure 43 in No. 175. 


General Jochmus to Admiral Stopford. 


Head Quarters, Jaffa, 
Sir, February 6, 1841. 


THE Chief of the Staff of this army, Mehemed Rechid Pasha, now at 
Gaza, having reported to me, that the Egyptian authorities maintain 
(verbally) that the Arabs of the Desert, who have pursued Ibrahim Pasha 
as far as Gaza, have secret orders still to harass him notwithstanding 
the Convention, I beg to transmit to your Excellency a copy of my letter 
to his Excellency Ibrahim Pasha on this subject, by which it will be per- 
ceived that orders to cease hostilities have been given on our part ever 
since the arrival of Hamid Bey and the other Commissioners of Peace. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) A. JOCHMUS, 
Lieutenant-General commanding the 
Army of Operations. 


Sub-Inclosure 44 in No. 175. 


General Jochmus to Ibrahim Pasha. 


Monsieur le Général, Quartier-Général de Jaffa, ips aa— 

APRES Vheureuse terminaison de la guerre en Syrie, je regrette 
d’apprendre que quelques Arabes du Désert continuent de harasser vos 
troupes. C’est au moins ce qu’on dit, car je n’ai pas de nouvelles offi- 
cielles. 

Il y a quinze jours, et immédiatement aprés l’arrivée de Hamid Bey, 
que tant son Excellence le Séraskier Ahmed Zacharias Pasha que moi 
ont donné partout des ordres précis de cesser les hostilités, et Hassan 
Pacha, commandant du cété du Djebel Khalil et du Désert, a non seule- 
ment agi d’aprés ces ordres, mais il a donné un sauf-conduit aux troupes 
sous le Général Ahmed Ménikli Pacha, pour les conduire a Gaza, en 
empéchant les Chéiks voisins de guerroyer. 

Toutefois, pour persuader votre Excellence de notre entiére bonne foi 
et notre désir sincére de faire cesser cette malheureuse guerre, j’envoie au 
quartier-général de votre Excellence deux officiers Autrichiens, M. le Comte 
Szechenyi et le Baron Dumont, munis d’ordres sévéres pour les Chéiks 
Arabes. Son Excellence le Séraskier écrira dans le méme sens a votre 
Excellence ce soir ou demain. 

En attendant, je me permets de recommander 4 l’accueil bienveillant 
de votre Excellence, M. le Comte Szechenyi, parent de son Excellence le - 
Prince Metternich, et M. le Baron Dumont, qui tous les deux se proposent 
de visiter Egypte, et qui pour cela m’ont demandé comme une faveur 
d’étre choisis pour étre porteurs de cette lettre, afin d’avoir ’honneur 
d’étre présentés a votre Excellence. | 

Heureux, si les affaires me le permettaient d’avoir moi-méme I’avan- 
tage de voir votre Excellence, je n’ai pour le présent cas que la prier 
_ @agréer lexpression de hommages avec laquelle j’ai, &c., 

(Signé) A. JOCHMUS, 


Lieutenant-Général commandant V Armée d’Opérations. 


(Translation.) 


Ge 3 vq 10 Zilkadé, 1256. 
neral, Head- Quarters, Fee ae 


AFTER the happy termination of the war in Syria I regret to Jearn 
that some of the Arabs of the desert continue to harass your troops. This 
is what is said at least, for I have no official account. | 


303 


A fortnight ago, and immediately after the arrival of Hamid Bey, 
both the Seraskier Ahmed Zacharias Pasha and myself gave everywhere 
precise orders to cease hostilities, and Hassan Pasha, commanding on the 
side of Djebel Khalil and the Desert, has not only acted upon these orders, 
but has given a safe conduct to the troops under the General Ahmed 
Menikli Pasha to take them to Gaza, preventing the neighbouring Sheiks 
from molesting them. 

At all events, in order to convince your Excellency of our entire good 
faith, and of our sincere desire to bring this unhappy war to an end, I 
send to your head-quarters two Austrian officers, Count Szechenyi and 
Baron Dumont, furnished with strict orders for the Arab Chiefs. His 
Excellency the Seraskier will write in the same sense to your Excellency 
either to-night or to-morrow. 

In the mean while, I take the liberty of recommending to your Excel- 
lency’s favourable notice Count Szechenyi, a relation of his Excellency 
Prince Metternich, and Baron Dumont, who both propose visiting Egypt, 
and who for that reason have requested of me as a favour to be selected 
as bearers of this letter, in order to have the honour of being presented to 
your Excellency. 

Happy if the state of affairs allowed me to have myself the advantage 
of seeing your Excellency ; I have only at present torequest you to accept 
the assurances, &c. 

(Signed) A. JOCHMUS, 


Lieutenant-General commanding the Army of Operations. 


Sub-Inclosure 45 in No. 175. 


General Jochmus to Commodore Napier. 


Imperial Head-Quarters, Jaffa, 
Sir, February 8, 1841. 


I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 
2nd February, by which you inform me that several frigates and trans- 
ports have been sent to embark the remains of the Egyptian army at 
Gaza. 

There exists neither on the part of his Excellency Ahmed Zacharias 
Pasha, Seraskier of Syria, nor on my own, any objections to this measure, 
as it hastens the evacuation of Syria; there existed, however, before the 
actual arrival of these transports, a very serious one, because we could 
not have sanctioned any delay under the possibly vain pretext that the 
Egyptians were waiting for transports, and consequently would not have: 
moved by land in the mean time. 

I am not aware that any difficulties have been raised by the Turkish 
authorities, in the way of the execution of the Convention or arrangement 
sanctioned by the Allied Powers and the Sublime Porte; but Ibrahim 
Pasha having de facto evacuated Syria, and being thrown into the Desert 
ever since the 6th January, when he quitted Kl-Mezerib, it certainly 
could not be contemplated by any Convention stipulating the evacuation 
of Syria, that it embraced also the eventuality of his returning into 
the country, particularly in the mode he attempted at Jericho on the 
14th and 15th of January, putting to fire and sword all the neigh- 
bourhood. 

It is to me a matter of real concern, that false reports, intentional or 
not, should have made you erroneously suppose that this army was des- 
tined to make any hostile movement on the remains of the Egyptian 
troops. If such had been the intention I should not have waited for a 
concentration of troops at Gaza, but should have attacked them as they 
arrived at long intervals, in isolated columns, from the Desert, in the most 
helpless state. 


aaa 


304 


If the Turkish authorities had really contemplated hostilities, an easy 
and valid excuse would have been found in the fact, that Ibrahim Pasha 
had already by two days exceeded the term of evacuation, granted on the 
30th of January for only seven days. { 

After acquainting you, Sir, with these circumstances, I cannot any 
further be responsible for reports arising from the visions of terrified 
imaginations at Gaza. cy , 

The Turkish authorities consulting the British officers at these head- 
quarters, have duly considered, in a General Council, your letter of the 
11th of January, and such instructions as they possess from other official 
sources in the present state of affairs in the Levant. Their proceedings 
have been made known both to his Excellency Admiral Sir Robert Stop- 
ford, and to the Sublime Porte. They accept without hesitation the con- 
sequences of their former resolutions, and of that taken to-day, to permit 
the embarkation of a corps of infantry at Gaza, notwithstanding that 
neither Sir R. Stopford’s orders, nor those of his Excellency Mazloum Bey, 
specify anything about the embarkation of armed bodies on any part 
of the Syrian coast, granting only this favour to women, children, sick, 
and wounded men. 

The brilliant services which you, Sir, rendered in this memorable war, 
have not been bestowed on a worthless cause, and the proceedings of the 
Ottoman Commanders and authorities are not so extravagant as they are 
deemed at Alexandria. They are (notwithstanding a momentary impres- 
sion to the contrary, founded on illusion) in conformity with the existing 
treaties, in conformity with the customs of civilized nations, in conformity 
with the laws of humanity, in conformity with the interests of the Sublime 
Porte, and, ranging higher than all these considerations, they are in con- 
formity with the military point of honour. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) A. JOCHMUS, 


Lieutenant-General commanding the Army of Operations. 


Sub-Inclosure 46 in No. 175. 


Captain Houston Stewart to Colonel Bridgeman. 


British Head-Quarters, Jaffa, 
Sir, February 14, 1841. 


THE evacuation of Syria by the Egyptians being now almost effected, 
I beg to represent to you the propriety which in my opinion exists for 
the Royal Marine Artillery being withdrawn from Sidon, and my reasons 
for forming this opinion are simply these:— 

Ist. My knowledge of the Admiral’s intention that they should be 
taken to Marmorice so soon as the officer commanding the British forces 
ceased to entertain any fears for the safety of Sidon. 

2ndly. The circumstance of the plague having made its appearance 
at Sidon, happily but in one case as yet, although now it is reported to be 
severe at Tyre; and foreseeing as | do much painful embarrassment should 
vi of the Royal Marine Artillery detachment be attacked by that 

isease, : 

3rdly. The necessity which I am under, in obedience to instructions, 
of sending all the vessels of war at present under my orders, to rejoin the 
flag at Marmorice so soon as Syria ig clear of the Egyptian troops, 
leaving only the “ Hecate’ steam-vessel at your disposal; whilst, by taking 
advantage of the presence of the “Magicienne,” the whole detachment 
with their field equipage could embark in that vessel, the “ Hazard” taking 
— the small remnant of the marine detachment still at St. Jean 
d’ Acre. 

Should you entertain any doubt of the removal of the Royal Marine 


Artillery being approved of, I feel myself quite justified, from the commu- 
nications [ have had with Sir R. Stopford, Sir C. F. Smith, and the late 
General Michell, to tender to you my earnest advice to do so, taking, as 


I readily do, my full share of any responsibility which may be incurred 
thereby. | 


I have, &c., 
(Signed) HOUSTON STEWART, 
Captain of Her Majesty’s ship “‘ Benbow,’ and 
Senior Officer on the Coast of Syria. 


Sub-Inclosure 47 in No. 175. 
Colonel Bridgeman to Captain Houston Stewart. 


British Head-Quarters, Jaffa, 
Sir, February 15, 1841. 

I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of 
yesterday’s date, representing the propriety which exists in your opinion 
for the removal of the Royal Marine Artillery from Sidon to the fleet. 
The evacuation of this country by the Egyptian army, the often repeated 
wishes of the Admiral Commanding-in-Chief, and the impression on my 
mind that it was the intention of the late Brigadier-General Michell to 
permit of their being so withdrawn, so soon as the posture of Syrian 
affairs would admit, must, of course, very much influence my judgment ; 
but, at the same time that I take upon myself the responsibility of 
assenting to their removal, | must confess that I much regret to find by 
your letter, that we are also to be deprived of the presence of the several 
ships of war now on the coast, with the exception of the ‘“ Hecate” 
steamer. As, however, in the event of an extension of the plague along 
the coast, it would be impossible, with one steamer only, to embark the 
Royal Artillery at Beyrout as well as the Royal Marine Artillery at 
Sidon, I must consider the absence of any ship of war as an additional 
reason for a diminution of the force. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) K. H. BRIDGEMAN, 


Colonel Commanding. 


Sub-Inclosure 48 in No. 175. 


General Jochmus to Admiral Stopford. 


: Head- Quarters, Jaffa, 
Sir, February 15, 1841. 

FROM the despatches and returns which [I had the honour to 
address to your Excellency on the 2nd and 3rd instant, it will have been 
perceived that the amount of the remains of tbrahim Pasha’s retiring 
army, was 18,800 combatants and 2,700 non-combatants, making a 
grand total of 21,500 men of all arms, regulars and irregulars. 

From all the reports and returns which I have since received from my 
Turkish and European Staff-Officers, most of whom were sent to ascertain 
their numbers, | find that this estimate requires no alteration and is 
perfectly correct. rh 

The remains of the Egyptian cavalry preserve some military order. 
The rest of the troops returned from Syria are utterly disorganized, and 
the daily losses from disease in consequence of excessive fatigue, amounted 
daily to 50 or 60 between the camp ae Gaza and El-Arish. 

2 


306 


It is extraordinary that the casualties should not be more numerous, 
considering the sufferings in the Desert, and the fact that whole regiments 
have been actually living for whole days on the grass and herbs of the 
wilderness. ' 

For more than ten days the only rations issued to most of the 
columns, were two or three camels for each regiment on the march. 

Ibrahim Pasha himself is very itl, and has sent for an English 
physician to their head-quarters. Dr. Robertson is gone to attend his 
Excellency. 

I do not suppose, according to the annexed estimate, that out of the 
whole of the remaining 21,500 men, more than one-half, or about 11,000, 
will be borne again on the strength of the Egyptian army. 

I have calculated the probable loss of the march from Maan to 
Gaza into Egypt, and the amount of desertion when arrived in Egypt, 
at only 4,000 men. If it be considered that a great proportion of the now 
remaining troops are married men, who did not desert in Syria because 
their wives and children went vid Maan, but who will desert on the very 
first occasion that offers in Egypt, the above estimated reduction will 
be found very moderate, the more so, as there are about 2,000 irregular 
Hennedy Horse who have pillaged Syria during ten years, and are 
averaged to carry from 15,000 to 20,000 piastres’ worth in horses, arms, 
and money, back into Egypt, all of whom will go to their homes. 

The last Egyptian troops have now left Gaza. In all, there were 
embarked, up to the 13th instant, about 3,000 sick, wounded, and 
others hors de combat, with some women, and the skeletons of some 
infantry regiments ; about 3,000 more men waited till to-day to embark, 
and were prevented by the surf. 

The rest went by land to Egypt vid El-Arish. 

It may be calculated that out of the débris of the former Syrian 
army and the regular troops still in Egypt, Mehemet Ali, or any future 
Pasha of Egypt, may re-form a peace establishment of 20,000 to 25,000 
effective soldiers. Such a force may also be maintained in the long run 
without too heavy charges, out of a population amounting at present 
from 1,800,000 to 2,000,000, of which the permanent soldiery would form 
1¢ per cent., and would eventually afford an accession of strength to the 
Turkish Empire. The larger rival military power on the banks of the 
Nile, now fortunately broken in its most essential elements, would have 
been only a seed of destruction in the Ottoman dominions. 

; I have, &c., 
(Signed) A. JOCHMUS, 
Lneutenant-General commanding the 
Army of Operations. 


307 


Sub-Inclosure 49 in No. 175. 


Estimate of the Effective Force of Ibrahim Pasha’s Army, returned to Egypt, and 
fit for further service. 


Head Quarters, Jaffa, February 10, 1841. 


Total of Regular and Irre- 
gular Forces, according to eS 
the General Returns of Grand 


DISTRIBUTION. February 2, 1841. 
Total. 


Effective Non-Comba- 
Combatants. tants. 


Returning to Egypt by Gaza and Maan : : 18,800 2,700 21,500 

Embarked at Gaza and sent to El-Arish for 
embarkation, on mules and camels as hors 
de combat . s . 4 : . 

Died of disease at Gaza and El-Arish du- 
ring the last 20 days, in consequence of 
excessive fatigue, at the rate of 50 men per 
day * S : ° . 

Deserted during that: time é eee ee 

Turks and Syrians to be sent back to Syria 
and Constantinople . . : . 

Probable loss on the march by the Desert to 
Cairo, and estimated desertion when ar- 
rived in Egypt . 


8,600 | 1,900 10,500 


Remain fit for further service . r 5 10,200 800 11,000 


Approved, (Signed) A. JOCHMUS, 
Lieutenant- General. 
J. FREESTUN, 
Assistant Adjutant- General. 


Sub-Inclosure 50 in No: 175. 


Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson to Colonel Bridgeman. 


Sir, Jaffa, February 19, 1841. 


HAVING this moment arrived from Gaza, I have the honour to 
report to you, that his Excellency Ibrahim Pasha embarked there yester- 
day afternoon; and during the night, the garrison, consisting of about 
800 men, also embarked on board the Egyptian steamer ‘“ Hadji Baba,” 
for Damietta; and that on his Excellency getting under weigh this morn- 
ing, the whole of the remaining cavalry, consisting of one regiment of 
cavalry of the guard, and one of cuirassiers, with two camps of irregular 
cavalry, marched from El-Arish, thus completing the evacuation of Syria 

ian troops. 
a eae beoabne of Turkish cavalry on the road to Gaza, to take 
possession of it in the name of the Sultan; and the new Governor was, I 
understood, expected in the course of the day. . 

The number of Egyptian troops, therefore, which have marched, and 
embarked from Gaza, consists of 29,000 regular troops, and 4,000 irregular 
ditto; including infantry, cavalry, and sick. ; 

In addition to these, must be taken into consideration the column 
which went by the Desert with the women, artillery, and detachments 
from every regiment for the protection of their sick and baggage, and 


said to exceed 4,000 men. 
sal : Bs 


308 


A very considerable number of women and children have also both 
marched and embarked from Gaza, not included in this statement. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) R. C. ALDERSON, 
Lieutenant-Colonel Commanding 
the Royal Engineers. 


No. 176. 


Lieutenant Aldrich to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received March 09 


Head- Quarters, Jaffa, 
My Lord, January 23, 1841. 


I REGRET 1 have to inform you, by the desire of Brigadier-General 
Micheil, that he is at present totally incapable of writing in consequence 
of severe suffering from fever and ague. He hopes, however, in a few 
days to be so far recovered as to have the honour of addressing your 
Lordship in detail, with reference to the events which have occurred in 
this country since his last despatch to you from Acre of the 3lst Decem- 
ber, 1840. 

Colonel Bridgeman, I regret to say, is equally unwell with the 
Brigadier-General from fever and ague. 

I am commanded to acquaint you of the arrival here, on the 17th 
instant, of Lieutenant Loring of Her Majesty’s ship ‘‘Carysfort,” bringing 
despatches from Commodore Sir Charles Napier, dated Alexandria, 10th 
January, 1841, announcing the favourable conclusion of his Treaty with 
Mehemet Ali. Lieutenant Loring was accompanied by Hamid Bey, an 
Kegyptian officer, the bearer of orders to Ibrahim Pasha from his father to 
evacuate Syria immediately. On the same day these officers, with a staff 
officer from the Seraskier and Major Wilbraham from the British head- 
quarters, as soon as horses and an escort could be procured for them, 
proceeded by Jerusalem to Ibrahim Pasha’s camp. On the 21st instant, 
in consequence of the arrival of a Turkish despatch, Lieutenant-Colonel 
Colquhoun of the Royal Artillery and Captain Arbuthnot of the Royal 
Navy followed those officers as British Commissioners, with the guarantee 
from his Excellency the Seraskier, Brigadier-General Michell, and from 
Captain Houston Stewart, Her Majesty’s ship “ Benbow,” that the 
divisions of the Egyptian Army retreating into Egypt should be protected 
and assisted, to cause as little delay and loss of life as possible. _ 

Captain Arbuthnot came here on the 20th instant, in Her Majesty’s 
sloop ‘‘ Dido.” 

The Brigadier-General commanding further desires me to acknow- 
ledge his receipt of your Lordship’s despatches to the 15th of December. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) EDWARD ALDRICH, 
Lneutenant, Assistant Military Secretary. 


No 177. 
Sir John Barrow to Lord Leveson. 


‘My Lord, Admiralty, March 13, 1841. 
I AM commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, to 
send you herewith, for the information of Viscount Palmerston, copies of 
a letter from Admiral the Honourable Sir Robert Stopford, dated the 1st 
of March last, and its accompanying letter from Lieutenant Loring, 
reporting his proceedings relative to the evacuation of Syria by the 
Egyptian troops. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) JOHN BARROW. 


&» 


309 


Inclosure in No. 177. 
Admiral Stopford to R. More O’ Ferrall, Esq. 


Sir, Malta, March 1, 1841. 


REFERRING you to my letter of this date, by ‘“ Prometheus,” 
vid France, I beg now to inclose the copy of Lieutenant Loring’s letter, 
alluded to in Commodore Sir Charles Napier’s letter of the 21st ultimo. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) ROBERT STOPFORD, 
Admiral. 


Sub-Inclosure in No. 177. 
Lieutenant Loring to Commodore Napier. 


Sir, Gaza, February, 17, 1841. 


_ I HAVE the honour to inform you, that in pursuance of your orders, 
dated Alexandria, January 10, 1841, I accompanied Hamid Bey in the 
steam-vessel ‘‘Generoso”’ to Acre; and having learnt from the autho- 
rities there, that the head-quarters of the Allied forces were established 
at Jaffa, proceeded to that place by land, the state of the weather 
rendering it improbable that disembarkation could be effected on the 
exposed beach. 

_ We arrived on the morning of the 17th of January, and [ immediately 
delivered to General Michell and Captain Stewart the despatches which 
you did me the honour to intrust to my care. By their recommendation 
we proceeded, as soon as the means of travelling could be procured, to 
Jerusalem, Major Wilbraham and Selim Bey accompanying us; the 
former by the order of General Michell, the latter by that of the Seras- 
kier, carrying also a letter to his Highness Ibrahim Pasha, and an order 
to all Turkish Authorities and Arab Sheiks to assist and forward us on 
our route. 

Arriving at Jerusalem at 10 a.m. the following morning, we learnt 
that Hassan Pasha, with 8,000 men and six pieces of artillery, had 
marched southward the day before, by Bethlehem and El1-Chalil, to cut 
off the retreat of the Egyptian army, supposed then to be in the neigh- 
bourhood of Kerek and retiring on Gaza. 

Anxious, from the spirit of your instructions, to prevent any hostile 
collision between the two armies, we hastened on, and were fortunate in 
overtaking the Turkish Pasha at El-Chalil in time to prevent his further 
advance; and he was soon afterwards induced to retire on Jerusalem, 
which place had been left unprotected by this forward movement. 

_ By the advice of Hassan Pasha, and under the protection of an Arab 
Sheik, we proceeded towards the ford of the Jordan; but, when in the 
neighbourhood of Engaddi, obtained information which caused the imme- 
diate alteration of our course southward, passing along the Dead Sea to 
the tents of Abdul Rahman. the Sheik of the El-Chalil district: here 
we were much disappointed at finding that, notwithstanding the order of 
the Seraskier, and although he came direct from the presence of the 
Pasha, by whom he had been sent to meet us, he at once refused to 
accompany us, or to assist our advance. 

As we were already acquainted with the impossibility of penetrating 
this wild country, without the active assistance of the Sheiks, (as the 
Arab hordes, caring for neither friend nor foe, were collected in consider- 
able force to plunder the rear of the retreating army,) we were obliged 
most reluctantly to turn our steps westward, and reached Gaza on the 
night of January 22, where we found that Ahmed Menikli Pasha had 
arrived the day before with the main body of the cavalry, and that the 
infantry were expected very soon in three divisions, Ibrahim Pasha himself 
bringing up the rear. 


310 


At the request of Hamid Bey, I immediately left for Jaffa, to repre-- 
sent to General Michell and the Authorities there the obstructions which 
we had met with from the Sheik Abdul Rahman, and also to complain, 
on the part of Ahmed Pasha, that the Arabs were still carrying on active 
hostilities ; and from him to request that the Turkish General should 
either himself suppress such irregularities, or permit the Egyptian troops 
to employ force. 

The death of the late lamented General Michell took place the 
morning after my arrival at Jaffa; but as soon after as circumstances 
would admit, Captain Stewart and Rechid Pasha proceeded to Gaza in 
the “ Hecate” to regulate such differences. Availing myself of the same 
opportunity, I returned to Gaza, and rejoined Hamid Bey and Major 
Wilbraham at Soumecha, where I found they had again been foiled by 
the Sheik Abdul Rahman, and we a second time returned to Gaza, 
where Ibrahim Pasha arrived on the afternoon of Sunday, January 31. 

I have since been employed, according to your orders, in co-operation 
with Colonel Alderson of the Royal Engineers, in seeing the evacuation 
of Syria by the Egyptian army carried into effect; and I have now the 
honour to acquaint you, that the whole of the troops have either marched 
for El-Arish, or have embarked for Damietta on their way to Cairo. 

I subjoin as accurate an estimate of the troops which have left Gaza en 
route for Egypt, as I have been able to procure; the numbers are under 
rather than over rated. The irregular cavalry and the Arabs of Hennadi 
I have found it quite impossible to count. Several Egyptian officers have 
named them at 10,000; but I think there can hardly have been so 
many. 

A division of 5,000 men with 175 pieces of artillery, under the com- 
mand of Solyman Pasha, are reported to have marched from El-Mezerib 
on January 9, by the way of Maan to Suez and Cairo. 


Regular infantry which have marched : 9,200 
Irregular or Arnaouts : ' . . T4060 
Sick and feeble who have been embarked 3,900 
Regular infantry : i . ; 8,250 
Irregular or Arnaout . ‘ : : 800 
— 23,550 
Regular cavalry which have marched . . 6,300 
Horse artillery . : . . : : 140 
— 6,440 
Total 29,990 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) WILLIAM LORING, 


Lieutenant Royal Navy. 


P.S.—TI have omitted to mention the garrison of Gaza, amounting to 
agit 600 men, and which have been embarked in the last steamer fro 
aza. é 


a 
No. 178. 
Colonel Bridgeman to Viscount Palmerston—(Received March 13.) 


British Head- Quarters, Jaffa, 

My Lord, January 26, 1841. A 
FROM a letter addressed to your Lordship by Lieutenant Aldrich 
the Assistant Military Secretary to the late Brigadier-General Michell, 
dated the 23rd of January, you will be led to expect a detailed report 
of the proceedings in Syria, from the time of the last despatch, dated 
the 3lst of December, 1840. As therefore I am sufficiently recovered 
from an attack of fever, with which I have been confined for some days 
? 


311 


‘I take the earliest opportunity of embodying and transmitting to your 
Lordship all the information which I can obtain from the sources at my 
command. 

On the 29th of December, 1840, Ibrahim Pasha personally and 
finally evacuated Damascus, marching upon El-Mezerib. The city was 
shortly afterwards occupied by the irregular cavalry in the Sultan’s 
service, and His Imperial Highness formally proclaimed. The Egyptian 
army halted at El-Mezerib on the 3d and 4th instant, and on the 5th, was 
supposed to have moved on the Desert road in four divisions. The force 
may then have amounted to about 30,000 men, but no positive information 
on this head has been obtained. Your Lordship is aware, that up to the 
31st of December, (the date of the last despatch which you will have 
received from General Michell,) the latest instructions to Lieutenant- 
General Jochmus, as well as to the officer commanding the British 
forces, from Lord Ponsonby, directed a continuance of offensive ope- 
rations against the Egyptian army. Acting up to the spirit of 
these orders, Lieutenant-General Jochmus, on the 5th of January, 
broke up his cantonments at Sidon and at Tyre, and with a portion 
of the garrison of St. Jean d’Acre, mustering in all twenty battalions 
of infantry, moved with his artillery and a small force of cavalry 
upon Jaffa and Ramla. This induced a corresponding movement of 
a part of the British force, and on the 6th instant, Brigadier-General 
Michell and his head-quarters in the “ Vesuvius” and “ Hecate” steam- 
vessels with 100 marines, and Lieutenant-Colonel Colquhoun’s detachment 
‘of Royal Artillery with their guns and stores from St. Jean d’Acre, 
proceeded to, and landed at Jaffa on the 7th. Lieutenant-Colonel Higgins’s 
detachment of the Royal Artillery with his guns and stores, and a small 
detachment of the Royal Sappers and Miners, were directed also to 
embark at Beyrout, in Her Majesty’s ship “ Magicienne,” on the 6th of 
January, and rejoined the Head-Quarters at Jaffa on the 11th. His 
Excellency the Seraskier, and Lieutenant-General Jochmus, (the latter of 
whom had been for some days making a reconnoissance in the neighbour- 
hood of Hasbeya, and thence to Jerusalem,) arrived at Jaffa on the 9th. 
On the 12th instant, Lieutenant-General Jochmus proposed a movement 
upon Gaza, in which the Seraskier and Rechid Pasha were induced to 
acquiesce. Brigadier-General Michell, and Captain Houston Stewart of Her 
Majesty’s ship “ Benbow,” the senior naval officer on the coast (and who 
had been at the British Head-Quarters from the 29th of December,) opposed 
and objected to the operation, from political as well as from military 
reasons. On the evening of the 12th, Lieutenant-General Jochmus 
and the Seraskier proceeded to Ramla, and on the 13th, Brigadier-General 
Michell, with his staff-officers, joined the Turkish Head-Quarters at the 
above-named village. The attack upon Gaza being positively resolved 
upon, General Michell deemed it his duty to accompany the Turkish 
force, and assist the operation to the utmost of his power, In furtherance 
of this object, Captain Houston Stewart proceeded on board Her Majesty’s 
steam-vessel “ Vesuvius” on the 14th instant, and with a reinforcement 
‘of one subaltern and fifty marines from the Jaffa garrison, the ‘“ Hecate” 
steamer accompanying, ran down the coast for the purpose of co-ope- 
rating, as events might dictate, with the land forces. The Turkish troops 
halted on the 13th at Ashdod, where, according to preconcerted arrange- 
ments, they were to have been joined by eight battalions from Jerusalem, 
under Rechid Pacha. This combined operation failed, however, as 
General Michell had foretold. Rechid Pasha, having been already two 
hours on his march towards Ashdod, received reports of Ibrahim Pasha’s 
movements, which induced him to return forthwith to Jerusalem. 

On the 14th, Lieutenant-General Jochmus (the Seraskier also being 
still present with the army) halted at Mejdill, three hours’ march from 
Gaza. A copy of Lieutenant-General Jochmus’s report of this operation, 
addressed to Sir Robert Stopford, is inclosed, (Inclosure 1.) As an allusion 
is made in this report to an affair with the enemy’s cavalry who had advanced 
in some numbers upon Meshdel, I hope your Lordship will pardon me for 
reporting to you the very spirited conduct of Colonel Rose, who, whilst 
heading a charge of a party of irregular cavalry, was wounded; but I am 


312 


happy to say, it has not turned-out to be of a serious nature. He has 
in consequence been recommended by the Seraskier to the Imperial 
Government for a Turkish order. 

I would also venture to mention to your Lordship, from my own per- 

sonal observation, that during the pursuit (and the retreat was executed 
by the enemy in admirable order), British officers were with the most 
advanced troops, cheering on the irregular cavalry; and that on relin- 
quishing the pursuit, having driven the enemy six or seven miles from 
our camp, our advance being then considerably inferior to the Egyptians, 
who had retired upon their reinforcements, the British officers were on the 
spot ready to assist in any further attack or pursuit. Major Wilbraham 
was present from the commencement of the affair, and we were joined 
-by Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson of the Royal Engineers, and by Major 
Robe, and Mr. Crawford, a Midshipman of Her Majesty’s ship “ Benbow,” 
who had for some time past been staying at our Head-Quarters with 
Captain Stewart. These officers having been sent to Ascalon to ascertain 
whether the steam-vessels were in sight, heard the firing on their return, 
and quickly joined the Turkish advanced troops. 
On the 16th instant, the Turkish infantry and artillery returned by 
the sea-coast from Meshdel to Jaffa. General Michell reached Jaffa the 
same day, and the “ Vesuvius” and “ Hecate” steamers also returned 
to their anchorage, and disembarked the marines, having found it im- 
possible to communicate with, or even to approach, the Gaza coast, in 
consequence of the severity of the weather. On the following morning, 
the 17th, Lieutenant Loring, of Her Majesty’s ship “ Carysfort,” accom- 
panied by Hamid Bey, arrived at Jaffa, the bearers of the Convention 
concluded at Alexandria by Commodore Napier. A report of this is made 
to your Lordship in Lieutenant Aldrich’s letter addressed to you on the 
23d instant. For further explanation of the notification here of the rati- 
fication of this Convention, I forward a letter (Inclosure 2) from Commo- 
dore Napier, addressed to General Michell. Inclosure 3 is a letter conse- 
.quently transmitted to Ibrahim Pasha by Brigadier-General Michell and 
Captain Houston Stewart, and despatched to the Head-Quarters of the 
Egyptian army by Major Wilbraham. Inclosure 4 is the copy of a 
letter addressed to the Commandant at Gaza. 

On the 20th inst. a Council of War was held, at which the absolute 
necessity of abstaining from all offensive measures against the Egyptian 
army was advocated and enforced. Inclosure 5 is a copy of Lieutenant- 
General Jochmus’s protest at the termination of the council, and Inclo- 
sure 6 is a letter also addressed to the Council by Mr. Wood. On the 
21st, Lieutenant-General Jochmus left Jaffa for Jerusalem, and by perusing 
the inclosed letter (Inclosure 7) from him to the Seraskier, your Lordship 
will be made acquainted with his position in that City. The staff-officers 
being all variously employed, Lieutenant-Colonel Colquhoun of the Royal 
Artillery was requested to proceed with Captain Arbuthnot to Jerusalem, on 
the 21st, with the instructions contained in Inclosures 8 and 9; and on the 
22nd, at the request of the Seraskier, another officer, Lieutenant-Colonel 
Alderson, Royal Engineers, proceeded to Gaza; his instructions are 
embodied in Inclosure 10. : 

I have thus endeavoured to furnish your Lordship with as complete 
a summary of the occurrences which have taken place from the date of 
Brigadier-General Michell’s last despatch to the day of his death, as my 
means will admit of. If I have trespassed too much upon your Lord- 
ship’s time, I trust I shall be pardoned. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) EK. H. BRIDGEMAN, 
Colonel commanding the British Forces in Syria. 


P.S.—I have omitted to acquaint your Lordship that Zacharias Pasha 
the new Seraskier Pasha, and the successor of Izzet Pasha, arrived x 
Beyrout on the 19th of December, from whence, as I have already men- 
tioned in my letter, he reached Jaffa on the 9th of J anuary. 


ee 


313 


Inclosure 1 in No. 178. 


[See Sub-Inclosure 32 in No. 175.] 


Inclosure 2 in No. 178. 
Commodore Napier to General Michell. 


Her Majesty’s Ship “‘Carysfort,” 
Sir, Alexandria, January 10, 1841. 

THE bearer of this letter is charged by me (agreeably to the orders of 
Sir Robert Stopford, in consequence of directions from Lord Palmerston, 
to carry my Convention into effect) to proceed with Hamid Bey to the 
head-quarters of Ibrahim Pasha, and to deliver to him the order of Mehe- 
met Ali, for the immediate evacuation of Syria. 

It is Sir Robert Stopford’s directions that every facility is to be 
given for the embarkation of the sick, the wounded, the women, and chil- 
dren, and others of the Egyptian Army at Kaiffa. 

But it appears to me (if there is no objection, of which I cannot be 
a judge here) they may be permitted to embark at any other place, if more 
convenient. 

The officer charged with despatches to Ibrahim Pasha will necessarily 
‘consult with him and with you on this point as well as the officer who is 
charged to see the evacuation carried into effect. 

It is needless to observe, that as Mehemet Ali has made his sub- 
mission to the Porte and is reinstated in the Pashalic of Egypt, it is of the 
utmost importance that Ibrahim should not only not be disturbed in his 
evacuation, but should be protected and assisted in every manner, so as to 
cause as little loss of life as possible. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) CHARLES NAPIER, 
Commodore. 


Inclosure 3 in No. 178. 
[See Sub-Inclosure 8 in No. 175.] 


Inclosure 4 in No. 178. 


[See Sub-Inclosure 9 in No, 175.] 


Inclosure 5 in No. 178. 


[See Sub-Inclosure 13 in No. 175.] 


Inclosure 6 in No. 178. 
[See Sub-Inclosure 14 in No. 175.] 


Inclosure 7 in No. 178. 
[See Sub-Inclosure 16 in No. 175.] 


258 


314 


Inclosure 8 in No. 178. 


[See Sub-Inclosure 10 in No. 17 5.4 | 


Inclosure 9 in No, 178, | | 
[See Sub-Inclosure 11 in No. 175.] 


Inclosure 10 in No, 178. 
[See Sub-Inclosure 12 in No. 175.] 


No. 179. 
Colonel Bridgeman to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received March 13.) — 


British Head-Quarters, Jaffa, 
My Lord, February 2, 1841. 


IN my despatch dated the 26th of January, 1841, I had the 
honour to lay before your Lordship a summary of events to the date of 
Brigadier-General Michell’s death, and I now resume the subject, and 
shall endeavour to place your Lordship in full possession of the several 
occurrences which have subsequently taken place. ee 

In the despatch of the 23rd of January, 1841, your Lordship 
was informed that, on the 17th of January, Major Wilbraham, accom- 
panied by Lieutenant Loring, Royal Navy, Hamid Bey, and a Staff- 
Officer of the Seraskier Pasha’s, left this place for Jerusalem, with orders 
to proceed thence to the head-quarters of Ibrahim Pasha. These officers, 
after a long and fruitless expedition by the southern extremity of the 
Dead Sea, turned westward to Gaza, hoping there to obtain some accurate 
information of Ibrahim Pasha’s line of march. From thence Lieutenant 
Loring returned to this place on the 23rd, bringing us the news of the 
arrival there, on the 22nd, of the advanced guard of Ibrahim Pasha’s 
army under the command of Ahmed Pasha. Major Wilbraham on the 
same day again left Gaza with Hamid Bey for El-Khalil, from whence 
on the 25th, in company with Hamid Bey, Omar Pasha the Turkish 
General, and Captain Arbuthnot, (with whom he had fallen in at El- 
Khalil,) he proceeded to the Pass of Suera, through which it was expected 
Ibrahim Pasha would retire to Gaza. 

In order to satisfy ourselves of the good faith of the Generals of the 
Egyptian army, and at the same time to afford them every possible assur- 
ance that the retreat of their army would be not only protected, but 
favoured and assisted to the utmost of our power, (they having expressed 
a slight distrust in consequence of some movements of the Turkish troops 
at El-Khalil,) Captain Stewart, accompanied by Rechid Pasha, Lieu- 
tenant Loring, Royal Navy, and Colonel Rose, embarked on the 25th on 
board Her Majesty’s steam-vessel “Hecate,” and landed early on that 
day at Gaza. They were at the same time to urge the speedy evacuation 
of that place, and the retirement to the Egyptian frontiers of the troops 
which were daily arriving. I also instructed Colonel Rose (so soon as 
he should be provided with a sufficient Turkish escort, taking with him 
an Egyptian officer of rank) to proceed on the route by which Ibrahim 
Pasha would most probably approach Gaza, and secure him, as far as 
possible, from any act of aggression on the part of the Bedouin Arabs, or 
other irregular troops. From the tenour of Lieutenant-General Jochmus’s 
protest transmitted to your Lordship in my despatch of the 26th ultimo, 
and from the letter of Mr. Wood, addressed to the Seraskier Pasha and 


315 


to the President of the Council, your Lordship will observe that there 
has been a manifest disposition to harass Ibrahim Pasha’s retreat. 

On the 24th of January, (the day before Captain Stewart proceeded 
to Gaza,) a Council was held at the Seraskier Pasha’s, at which Captain 
Stewart and Colonel Rose were present. On leaving the Council, they 
were under the full impression that all intention of offensive operations 
against Ibrahim Pasha was abandoned, and that the Convention would 
be acted up to with sincerity and good faith. With the greatest surprise, 
therefore, Captain Stewart ascertained subsequently, in the course of 
conversation with Rechid Pasha, that notwithstanding this supposed 
decision of the Council, orders had been sent to General Jochmus to 
act upon Ibrahim Pasha’s line of retreat, and to throw every impedi- 
ment in his way, but to abstain from any direct attack. These orders 
were given under the impression that Ibrahim Pasha’s force was very 
considerably reduced as to numbers, and in a completely disorganized 
state. 

The very large and comparatively effective force, however, which (so 
contrary to their general assumption of the almost. entire disorganization 
of the Egyptian army in the desert) was concentrated at Gaza, had in 
the mean time considerably influenced Rechid Pasha, and convinced him 
that coercive measures against Ibrahim Pasha were hopeless. He 
returned, therefore, forthwith to Jaffa, arriving here on the morning of 
the 26th. Captain Stewart having written me word of the discovery 
he had made from Rechid Pasha of the transmission of orders by the 
Council for the discomfiture of the Egyptian retiring force, I immediately 
proceeded to the Seraskier Pasha’s, where Rechid Pasha placed in my 
hands the very letter, which, as he assured me, had been written by him 
with the consent of the Council to General Jochmus, but which he found had 
not been sent. I strongly protested against the course they had adopted, 
by which the honour of the British name and of the Turkish cause would 
so assuredly have been compromised, as being so directly at variance 
with the assurances which Captain Stewart and Colonel Rose had made 
to Ahmed Pasha, and I received the most positive declaration that no 
hostile movements of any nature should be made, and that every possible 
assistance should be given to the Egyptians. To reiterate these assu- 
rances personally to Ahmed Pasha, Rechid Pasha returned on the 28th of 
January to Gaza. The Seraskier Pasha and Rechid Pasha also proposed 
the removal of 17 battalions of infantry from Jerusalem to Ramla, of 
2,000 irregular cavalry to Ashdod, and of two regiments of irregular 
cavalry to reinforce a small advanced post of Lancers at Meshdel. To 
the removal of the 17 battalions from Jerusalem to Ramla as purely a 
defensive measure, and consequent upon the parallel movement of Ibrahim 
Pasha’s troops upon Gaza, I did not object, nor did I to the addition of 
the two regiments of regular cavalry, merely suggesting that they should 
be stationed at Ashdod instead of Meshdel,as being a connecting link 
with Jaffa and Ramla, and further removed from the Egyptian canton- 
ments at Gaza; but I did object, and was obliged strongly to protest, 
before I gained my point, against the advance to Ashdod of any irregular 
troops. These forces are under little or no control, and would, in all 
probability, have taken the first opportunity of placing themselves upon 
the line of march of any isolated Egyptian column, and of committing 
the same excesses as the Bedouin Arabs, from whose attacks (and they 
pay but little respect to either Turkish or Egyptian flag) we were doing 
all in our power to secure the Egyptian force. 

On the 29th of January I received from Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson, 
who still remained at Gaza in communication with Ahmed Pasha, the 
Note of which a copy is inclosed (Inclosure 1), and which he and Captain 
Stewart had obtained from Ahmed Pasha and the other Egyptian 
Generals, exchanging with them all possible assurance of good faith in the 
execution of the Convention. Inclosure 2 is the partial affirmation of this 
document by the Seraskier Pasha, Lieutenant-General Jochmus, and the 
Moustechar Effendi; and Inclosure 3 is the copy of my letter to Lieutenant- 
Colonel Alderson, in which it is transmitted. Major Wilbraham and his 
companions ceased not, in the pee to prosecute their search, and 

25 2 


316 


were twenty-four hours in the desert without water ; all their exertions 
were, however, fruitless, and it was not until the 3lst of January, that 
Colonel Rose (in consequence of information obtained from some deserters 
of Ibrahim Pasha’s column) was enabled to ascertain his exact line of 
march. On the morning of that day he came up with Ibrahim Pasha 
about twenty miles from Gaza, on the route from the southern extremity 
of the Dead Sea; and having delivered to him a copy of Mehemet Ali’s 
instructions for the evacuation of Syria, accompanied him to Gaza. 'This 
morning Colonel Rose and Captain Stewart returned from thence, and 
the former officer has placed in my hands the inclosed translated copy of 
a Note addressed to the Seraskier Pasha by Ibrahim Pasha, with which 
the Seraskier has expressed himself as satisfied. From the reports I 
have received, it would appear that the Egyptian force which has reached 
Gaza, amounted to about 15,000 infantry and 6,000 or 7,000 cavalry. Of 
the former, 2,000 men are stated to have been sent to Kl-Arish before the 
arrival at Gaza of Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson: subsequently, six 
regiments of regular cavalry, amounting to about 2,400 men, and 1,200 
irregular cavalry, have also retired; and Captain Stewart is decidedly of 
opinion, that the evacuation will be performed without any unnecessary 
delay, and that within a fortnight not an armed Egyptian will remain in 
Syria. But whilst the wind remains in its present quarter, it is impos- 
sible either to land the biscuit for the troops, which they must carry 

with them on their homeward march, or to embark the women, the sick, 
and the wounded. | 
Colonel Rose having had some personal communication with Ibrahim 
Pasha, and being enabled to afford further information, I have ventured 
to direct him to proceed in Her Majesty’s steam-vessel ‘“‘ Vesuvius,” to 
carry my despatches to Admiral Sir Robert Stopford and to Lord 
Ponsonby, returning, so soon as he has delivered them, to the head- 
quarters of our force. I purpose proceeding to Gaza on the 5th instant. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) K. H. BRIDGEMAN, 
Colonel Commanding the British 
Forces in Syria. 


P.S.—Probable Turkish force in Southern Syria:—regular infantry 
18,000; regular cavalry 3,500; rregular cavalry 3,000; irregular infantry 
of the Lebanon and Naplouse, 10,000. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 179. 
[See Sub-Inclosure 18 in No. 175.] 


Inclosure 2 in No. 179. 


[See Sub-Inclosure 19 in No. 175.] 


Inclosure 3 in No. 179. 
[See Sub-Inclosure 20 in No. 175.] 


Inclosure 4 in No. 179. 


[See Sub-Inclosure 21 in No. 175.] 


317 
No. 180. 
Lieutenant-Colonel Napier to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received March 13.) 


My Lord, , Alexandria, February 2, 1841. 


_- I TAKE the liberty of inclosing to your Lordship the copy of a 
despatch I sent to-day to the officer in command of the British force in 
Syria, as it-is likely to reach England long before you could receive the 
same intelligence from our head-quarters, at present at Jaffa. 
y I have, &c., 
(Signed) K. E. NAPIER, 
Lieutenant-Colonel, Assistant Adjutant-General 
to the Forces in Syria. 


Inclosure in No. 180. 


Lieutenant-Colonel Napier to Colonel Bridgeman. 


Sir, Alexandria, February 2, 184). 


{ HAVE the honour to inform you, that after my audience with his 
Highness Mehemet Ali, on the 25th ultimo, (with the result of which I 
made you acquainted,) I went in quest of Commodore Napier, whom I 
met with a short distance from Cairo, and returned with him to 
‘Alexandria. 

With respect to the departure of the Syrians, the Commodore informs 
me, that although no mention was made of them in the Convention, it was 
perfectly understood that those who did not wish to accompany Ibrahim’s 
army voluntarily to Egypt, were to be left at Gaza; but Commodore 
Napier is of opinion, that should you entertain any suspicion of its being 
intended to employ them against Ibrahim’s retreating force, they had better 
be allowed to accompany him to Egypt, or to be disarmed. 
| I inclose a copy of the Convention, and mention the Commodore’s 
request, that you use your utmost endeavours to prevent a collision. 
‘between the Turks and the Egyptians. 
- . I have, &c., 

(Signed) K. E, NAPIER, 
Lieutenant-Colonel, Assistant Adjutant-General.. 


No. 181. 


Mr. Consul Moore to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received March 13.) 


My Lord, Beyrout, February 17, 1841. 
I HAVE the honour to inclose copy of my letter of the 13th to 
the Commanding Officer of Her Majesty’s naval forces on the coast 
of Syria, and to inform your Lordship, that in consequence thereof, 
Captain Stewart arrived here last night, from Jaffa, by the “ Vesuvius” 
steamer, 
; Mr. Wood, to whom [I wrote on the subject, accompanied by Hoossein 
Pasha, is also come for the purpose of enquiring into, and preventing a 
‘recurrence of, the disorders committed by the Albanian troops in the 
service of the Porte. 

The Seraskier, at Mr. Wood’s desire, likewise left Jaffa for Beyrout, 
immediately on the receipt of my letter, for the same object. 
: Ibrahim Pasha was to embark from Gaza, as soon as the state of the 
weather would permit, and I conclude, that by this time his Highness 
must be at sea, on his way to Alexandria, as the weather is now 
favourable, 


318 


The “Hecate” is hourly expected here, with positive information to 
that effect; and your Lordship will doubtless be informed, by this oppor- 
tunity, through other channels, of Ibrahim Pasha’s embarkation. _ “ 

in Mr. Wood’s opinion, the capture of Ibrahim Pasha and his shat- 
tered army was a certainty, had not the news of the Convention caused 
the suspension of operations against him. » 

The “ Vesuvius” has brought up the marines, and the corps of artil- 
lery, from Jaffa; and Colonel Bridgeman and staff are expected here, 
without delay. 

Solyman Pasha, with his division, had arrived at Akaba. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) N. MOORE. 


P. S.—I beg to inclose a duplicate copy of the Note addressed to the 
Seraskier, by myself and colleagues collectively, on the 1ith instant, upon 
the subject of the disorders committed by the Albanians. 

I am happy to say, that in consequence of the measures taken, the 
demeanour of the Albanians has been much more orderly, and the public 
mind greatly tranquillized within the last two days. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 181. 


Mr. Consul Moore to Captain Houston Stewart. 


Sir, Beyrout, February 13, 1841. 


I WRITE, in the greatest haste, to acquaint you with the arrival, 
two days ago, in this town and neighbourhood, of a corps of about 2,000 
Albanians. 

Disorders and outrages of the most revolting description have marked 
their passage along the coast, from Tripoli to Beyrout. 

Notwithstanding my strongest remonstrances to the contrary, these 
troops have been allowed to occupy houses in the neighbourhood, (from 
which the inhabitants have been expelled,) and to encamp in numbers, close 
to the town. 

Only last night, the Spanish Vice-Consul was fired upon by one of 
these assassins, whilst at the door of his own residence. Providentially, 
the pistol missed fire. 

I have the honour to inform you, that Captain Henderson, at my 
request, accompanied me this morning to the Governor’s, where, in a con- 
ference with the Turkish Commandant, we insisted, in the strongest 
terms, on the immediate removal, from the town and neighbourhood, of 
the Albanians ; but both these functionaries are evidently under the influe 
ence of fear, and we have not been able to attain the object of our 
Interview. 

Such is the consternation that has seized the inhabitants of the 
neighbourhood, that public criers have called the people to arms, for the 
protection of their families and property. 

Allow me, Sir, to call your immediate attention to this state of things; 
the town is evidently in the power of these brigands, as neither the 
Governor or Commandant dare issue orders for their removal. 

I have already written to the Seraskier on the subject. I beg to refer 
for details, which time will not allow of my entering into, to Captain Hen- 
derson, to whom my warmest thanks are due, for the zeal and energy with 
which he has seconded my representations to the Authorities here. — 

+ deg I have, &c., 
(Signed) N. MOORE. 


P. S.—It is equally necessary that the neighbourhood should be pro- 
‘tected, and nothing short of the total removal of these people will calm 
the ferment their presence has created. . 
___ The Governor has published an order, requiring all the women and 
children to shut themselves up on the approach of the Albanians: and the 


3lg 


people from the country, in the greatest terror, began to remove their 
effects into the town. 7 } | 

Considering how absolutely ruinous to many poor people this removal 
would be, the general disorder it would create, and the bad effects it 
‘would produce throughout the country generally, where it is above all 
things necessary, at the present moment, to inspire confidence, and give 
stability to the new Government, I induced the Governor, by strong 
remonstrances and representations of the impolicy of such a proceeding, 
to withdraw his order for the sequestration of the women and children, 
and to publish a counter notice, assuring every one of perfect security. 

Having assumed so grave a responsibility by the above measure, 
which I conceived the interests of the Ottoman Government required, I 
feel most anxious to redeem the pledge which I have thus. given for the 
general security, and which nothing can ensure but the removal of the 
Albanians from the country, where there is no necessity whatever for their 
presence. : 


Inclosure 2 in No, 181. 


Note to the Seraskier by the Consuls of the Allied Powers. 


Beyrout, le 11 Feévrter, 1841. 


LES Soussignés, Consuls. des Puissances Alliées de la Sublime Porte, 
sempressent d’appeler attention de Son Altesse le Séraskier Pacha sur 
les désordres commis en dernier lieu par quelques corps de troupes qui 
viennent de pénétrer dans cette partie de la Syrie. Le pillage et les vio- 
lences quils ont exercés sur leur passage ont répandu la terreur parmi les 
habitans; dans plusieurs localités ces derniers ont eu recours aux armes 
pour la défense de leurs habitations et de Vhonneur de leurs familles; si 
une collision sérieuse n’a pas encore éclaté, on ne saurait Vattribuer qu’a 
la modération et la prudence des habitans, et surtout 4 leur fidélité et 
leur dévouement au Gouvernement de Sa Hautesse,—sentimens dont ils 
viennent de donner des preuves si éclatantes. 

Une nouvelle expédition de troupes irréguliéres vient d’arriver a 
Beyrout. Les réclamations des Soussignés, et la sollicitude du Gouver- 
neur, ont empéché leur entrée en ville; toutefois les campagnes environ- 
nantes sont en proie aux plus vives alarmes. 

Témoins de cet état de choses, les Soussignés se bornent a signaler 
Vimminence du danger; ils aiment a espérer que les ordres nécessaires 

‘seront immédiatement donnés pour l|’éloignement de ces troupes, dont la 
présence parait tout-a-fait inutile dans cette partie de la Syrie, et menace 
-de compromettre les intéréts de la Sublime Porte. Ils s’attendent égale- 
ment a ce que des mesures efficaces soient prises, afin de réprimer le 
renouvellement de ces désordres, et de rassurer la population. 

En s’acquittant ainsi d’un devoir qui leur est imposé par les disposi- 
tions mémes de leurs Gouvernemens respectifs envers la Sublime Porte, 
‘ainsi que par Vhumanité, les Soussignés s’empressent d’offrir 4 Son 
Altesse Passurance de leur considération trés-distinguée, 


(Signé) N, MOORE, | 
Consul d’ Angleterre. 

P. LAURELLA, 
Consul d’ Autriche. 
J. CHASSEAUD, — ° 
‘Consul de Prusse. ' 

C. BASILY, 

Consul de Russie. ° 


320 


(Translation.) ’ 
Beyrout, February 11, 1841. 


THE Undersigned, Consuls of the Powers Allies of the Sublime 
Porte, hasten to call the attention of his Highness the Seraskier Pasha to 
the disorders lately committed by some bodies of troops which have just 
penetrated into this part of Syria. The pillage and the violence which 
they have committed on their passage, have spread terror among the inha- 
bitants; in several places the latter have had recourse to arms for the 
defence of their habitations and the honour of their families ; if a serious 
collision has not already taken place, it is only to be attributed to the 
moderation and prudence of the inhabitants, and, above all, to their fide- 
lity and their devotion to the Government of His Highness, feelings of 
which they have just given such striking proofs. 

A fresh detachment of irregular troops has just arrived at Beyrout. 
The representations of the Undersigned and the care of the Governor 
have prevented their entrance into the city; however the surrounding 
country is a prey to the greatest alarm. 

The Undersigned, being witnesses of this state of things, confine 
themselves to pointing out the. imminence of the danger. They hope that 
the necessary orders will immediately be given for the removal of the 
troops, whose presence appears entirely useless in this part of Syria, and 
threatens to compromise the interests of the Sublime Porte. They also 
expect that effective measures will be taken in order to put down any 
recurrence of these disorders and to tranquillize the population. 

In thus fulfilling a duty which is imposed upon them, as well by the 
dispositions of their respective Governments towards the Sublime Porte, as 
by humanity, the Undersigned hasten to offer to his Highness the assu- 
rance of their most distinguished consideration. 

(Signed) N. MOORE, 
Consul d’ Angleterre, 
P. LAURELLA, 
Consul d’ Autriche, 
J. CHASSEAUD, 
Consul de Prusse, 
C. BASILY, 
Consul de Russie. 
SS Ee La ee eS a PEs 


/ 


No. 182 


Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston —(Received March 14.) 


My Lord, Paris, March 12, 1841. 


I HAD an interview this morning with M. Guizot. His Excellency 
read to me the greater part of a despatch which he had addressed to M. 
Bourqueney in reply to the confidential communication which your Lord- 
ship had made to the French Chargé d’Affaires, regarding a project.of 
Convention to be signed by France, as well as by the other Great Powers 
of Europe. 

This despatch, in its essential points, corresponded with the lan- 
guage which I, on Monday last, stated to your Lordship, the French 
Minister had held to me on this subject. M.Guizot then read to mea 
second despatch which he had written to the Baron de Bourqueney on 
Tuesday last, after having received intelligence from M. Cochelet of the 
refusal of _Mehemet Ali to accede to the conditions of the Sultan’s firman, 
reappointing Mehemet Ali, Pasha of Egypt. M. de Bourqueney is in this 
despatch directed to suspend the execution of the instructions previously 
sent to him, which were founded upon the assumption (contained in Pro- 
tocols confidentially communicated to him by your Lordship), that the 
question between the Sultan and Mehemet Ali had been finally concluded. 
But M. Guizot said to me, that, whenever it was clearly established that 


321 


the Treaty of July was a fait accompli, the French Government would 
send full powers to their Representative in London, to Sign a Convention, 
such as had been proposed to M. de Bourqueney by your Lordship. His 
Excellency made no observations upon the rigorous conditions imposed 
upon Mehemet Ali by the Sultan; but he said that his despatches from 
Constantinople stated, that Colonel Hodges had expressed disapprobation 
of the evasive mode of granting hereditary succession to Mehemet Ali: 
and that those from M. Cochelet stated that Commodore Sir Charles 
Napier had given his opinion that Mehemet Ali could not accept the con- 
ditions of the Sultan’s firman. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) GRANVILLE. 


No. 183.* 
Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, March 16, 1841. 


I TRANSMIT to your Excellency a draft of a Protocol of a Con- 
ference between the Plenipotentiaries of Great Britain, Austria, Prussia, 
Russia, and the Sublime Porte; and a draft of a Convention between 
Great Britain, Austria, France, Prussia, and Russia, on the one part, and 
the Sublime Porte on the other part; which have been provisionally 
agreed to by the respective Plenipotentiaries, and which Her Majesty’s 
Government hope will soon be signed by those Plenipotentiaries. 

I am, &c., 


(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 183. 
Draft of Protocol. 


LES difficultés dans lesquelles Sa Hautesse le Sultan s’est trouvé 

placé, et qui l’ont déterminé a réclamer l’appui et |’assistance des Cours 
d’Autriche, de la Grande Bretagne, de Prusse, et de Russie, venant d’étre 
applanies, et Méhémet Ali ayant fait envers Sa Hautesse le Sultan l’acte 
de soumission que la Convention du 15 Juillet était destinée 4 amener, les 
Représentans des Cours signataires de la dite Convention ont reconnue, 
qu’indépendamment de l’exécution des mesures temporaires résultant de 
cette Convention, il importe essentiellement de consacrer, de la maniére 
la plus formelle, le-respect da a l’ancienne régle de |’Empire Ottoman, en 
vertu de laquelle il a été de tout tems défendu aux batimens de guerre 
des Puissances étrangéres d’entrer dans les détroits des Dardanelles et du 
Bosphore. — ; 
_ Ce principe étant par sa nature d’une application générale et perma- 
~nente, les Plénipotentiaires respectifs, munis 4 cet effet des ordres de 
leurs Cours, ont été d’avis, que pour manifester ?accord et Punion qui 
président aux intentions de toutes les Cours dans l’intérét de l’affermisse- 
ment de la paix Européenne, ‘il conviendrait de constater le respect da au 
principe susmentionné, au moyen d’une transaction 4 laquelle la France 
serait appelée’a concourir, 4 Vinvitation et d’aprés le voeu de Sa Hautesse 
le Sultan. sid wt) ae 

Cette transaction étant de nature.a offrir 4./?Europe un gage de 
Vunion des Cing Puissances, le Principal Secrétaire d’Ktat de Sa Majesté 
Britannique ayant le Département des Affaires Etrangéres, accord avec 
les Plénipotentiaires des Quatre autres Puissances, s'est chargé de. porter 
cet objet A la connaissance du Gouvernement Frangais, en, ! invitant & 
 participer a la transaction, par laquelle, d’une- part, le Sultan déclarerait 

‘sa’ ferme résolution de maintenir a l’avenir le susdit. principe; de l'autre 
ay! * A similar despatch: was sent to the Marquess of Clanricarde, Lord William Russell, Lord 
_ Beauyale, and Earl Granville. : ; | 
Ps ; 2 7T 


322 


les Cing Puissances annonceraient leur détermination unanime de 
respecter ce principe et de s’y conformer. , 
(Paraphé) E. N. 


QRwT 


(Translation. ) 


THE difficulties in which His Highness the Sultan was placed, and 
which decided him to apply for the support and the assistance of the 
Courts of Austria, Great Britain, Prussia, and Russia, being now removed, 
and Mehemet Ali having made towards His Highness the Sultan the act 
of submission which the Convention of the 15th of July was designed 
to bring about, the Representatives of the Courts, parties to the said 
Convention, have considered that, independently of the execution of the 
temporary measures resulting from that Convention, it is of essential im- 
portance to record in the most formal manner, the respect which is due to 
the ancient rule of the Ottoman Empire, in virtue of which it has at all 
times been prohibited for Ships of War of Foreign Powers to enter the 
Straits of the Dardanelles and of the Bosphorus. | 

This principle being from its nature one of general and permanent 
application, the respective Plenipotentiaries, provided with the orders of 
their Courts to this effect, have been of opinion that, in order to manifest 
the agreement and union which regulate the intentions of all the Courts 
in what concerns the maintenance of the peace of Europe, it would be 
proper to record the respect which is due to the above-mentioned prin- 
ciple, by means of an arrangement in which France should be invited to 
concur, at the invitation, and agreeably to the wish, of the Sultan. 

This arrangement being calculated to afford to Europe a pledge of 
the union of the Five Powers, Her Britannic Majesty’s Principal Secre- 
tary of State for Foreign Affairs, agreeably to an understanding with the 
Plenipotentiaries of the Four Powers, undertook to bring this mat- 
ter to the knowledge of the French Government, requesting it to take part 
in an arrangement by which, on the one hand, the Sultan should declare 
his firm resolution to maintain for the future the above-mentioned prin- 
ciple; the Five Powers, on the other hand, should announce their unani- 
mous determination to respect that principle and to conform themselves 
thereto. 

(Initialed) K. N. 


OW RT 


Inclosure 2 in No. 183. 
Draft of Convention. 


LEURS Majestés ’Empereur d’Autriche, Roi de Hongrie et de 
Bohéme, le Roi des Francais, la Reine du Royaume Uni de la Grande 
Bretagne et d’Irlande, le Roi de Prusse, et ’Empereur de toutes les 
Russies, persuadées que leur union et leur accord offrent a l'Europe le 
gage le plus certain de la conservation de la paix générale, objet constant 
de leur sollicitude; et leurs dites Majestés voulant attester cet accord en 
donnant 4 Sa Hautesse le Sultan une preuve manifeste du respect qu’elles 
portent 4 Vinviolabilité de ses droits Souverains, ainsi que de leur désir 
sincére de voir se consolider le repos de son Empire; leurs dites Majestés 
ont résolu de se rendre a invitation de Sa Hautesse le Sultan, afin de 
constater en commun, par un Acte formel, leur détermination unanime de 


323 


se conformer 4 Vancienne régle de Empire Ottoman, d’aprés laquelle le 
passage des détroits des Dardanelles et du Bosphore doit toujours étre 
fermé aux batimens de guerre étrangers, tant que la’Porte se trouve 
en paix. 

Leurs dites Majestés d’une part, et Sa Hautesse le Sultan de l’autre, 
ayant résolu de conclure entre elles une Convention a ce sujet, ont nommé 
a cet effet pour leurs Plénipotentiaires ; savoir: 

: Sa Majesté ’/Empereur d’Autriche, Roi de Hongrie et de Bohéme, 
c. &e.; 

Sa Majesté le Roi des Francais, &c. &c. ; 

Sa Majesté la Reine du Royaume Uni de la Grande Bretagne et 
d’Irlande, &c. &c.; 

Sa Majesté le Roi de Prusse, &c. &c. ; 

Sa Majesté l’Empereur de toutes les Russies, &c. &c. ; 

Et Sa Majesté le trés Majestueux, trés Puissant, et trés Magnifique 
Sultan Abdul Medjid, Empereur des Ottomans, &c. &c. 

Lesquels, s’étant réciproquement communiqué leurs Pleins Pouvoirs, 
trouvés en bonne et due forme, ont arrété et signé les Articles suivans: 


ARTICLE I. 


Sa Hautesse le Sultan, d’une part, déclare qu’il a la ferme résolution 
de maintenir a lavenir le principe invariablement établi comme ancienne 
régle de son Empire, et en vertu duquel il a été de tout tems défendu 
aux batimens de guerre des Puissances étrangéres d’entrer dans les 
détroits des Dardanelles et du Bosphore; et que, tant que la Porte se 
trouve en paix, Sa Hautesse n’admettra aucun batiment de guerre 
étranger dans les dits détroits. 

Et leurs Majestés PEmpereur d’Autriche, Roi de Hongrie et de 
Bohéme, le Roi des Frangais, la Reine du Royaume Uni de la Grande 
Bretagne et d’Irlande, le Roi de Prusse, et l’Empereur de toutes les 
Russies, de autre part, s’engagent a respecter cette détermination du 
Sultan, et 4 se conformer au principe ci-dessus énoncé. 


ARTICLE II. 


Il est entendu, qu’en constatant Vinviolabilité de l’ancienne régle de 
VYEmpire Ottoman mentionnée dans l’Article précédent, le Sultan se 
réserve, comme par le passé, de délivrer des firmans de passage aux 
batimens légers sous pavillon de guerre, lesquels seront employés comme 
il est d’usage au service des légations des Puissances amies. 


ARTICLE III. 


Sa Hautesse le Sultan se réserve de porter la présente Convention a 
la connaissance de toutes les Puissances avec lesquelles la Sublime Porte 
se trouve en relation d’amitié, en les invitant a y accéder. 


ARTICLE IV. 
La présente Convention sera ratifiée, et les ratifications en seront 
échangées 4 Londres a l’expiration de mois, ou plus tét si faire 


se peut. Bas ay 
En foi de quoi, les Plénipotentiaires respectifs l’ont signée, et y ont 
apposé les sceaux de leurs armes. 


Fait a Londres le de l’an de grace mil huit cent quarante et un. 
(Paraphé) Ere Ne 

B. 

ee 

B. 

B. 

C. 


ahee 


(Translation.) 


THEIR Majesties the Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary and 
Bohemia, the King of the French, the Queen of the United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Ireland, the King of Prussia, and the Emperor of all 
the Russias, being persuaded that their union and their agreement offer 
to Europe the most certain pledge for the preservation of the general 
peace, the constant object of their solicitude ; and their said Majesties 
being desirous of testifying this agreement by giving to the Sultan a 
manifest proof of the respect which they entertain for the inviolability of 
his sovereign rights, as well as of their sincere desire to see consolidated 
the repose of his empire; their said Majesties have resolved to comply 
with the invitation of His Highness the Sultan, in order to record in 
common, by a formal Act, their unanimous determination to conform to 
the ancient rule of the Ottoman Empire, according to which the passage 
of the Straits of the Dardanelles and of the Bosphorus is always to be 
closed to foreign ships of war, so long as the Porte is at peace. 

Their said Majesties, on the one part, and His Highness the Sultan 
on the other part, having resolved to conclude between them a Convention 
on this subject, have named for that purpose as their Plenipotentiaries, 
that is to say: 

His Majesty the Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary and Bohemia, 
&c., &e. ) 

His Majesty the King of the French, &c., &c. 

Her Majesty the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Ireland, &c., &c, 

His Majesty the King of Prussia, &c., &c. 

His Majesty the Emperor of all the Russias, &c., &c. 

And His Majesty the most majestic, the most mighty, and the most 
magnificent Sultan Abdul Medjid, Emperor of the Ottomans, &c., &c. 

Who, having reciprocally communicated to each other their respective 
Full Powers, found to be in good and due form, have agreed upon and 
signed the following Articles : 


ARTICLE I. 


His Highness the Sultan, on the one part, declares that he is firmly 
resolved to maintain for the future the principle invariably established as 
the ancient rule of his empire, and in virtue of which it has at all times 
been prohibited for the Ships of War of Foreign Powers to enter the 
Straits of the Dardanelles and of the Bosphorus; and that, so long as the 
Porte is at peace, His Highness will admit no foreign ship of war into 
the said Straits. 

And their Majesties the Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary and 
Bohemia, the King of the French, the Queen of the United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Ireland, the King of Prussia, and the Emperor of all 
the Russias, on the other part, engage to respect this determination of the 
Sultan and to conform themselves to the principle above specified. 


ARTICLE It. 


It is understood that in recording the inviolability of the ancient rule 
of the Ottoman Empire mentioned in the preceding Article, the Sultan 
reserves to himself, as in past times, to deliver firmans of passage for 
light vessels under flag of war, which shall be employed as is usual in 
the service of the Missions of foreign Powers. 


ARTICLE III. 


His Highness the Sultan reserves to himself to communicate the 
present Convention to all the Powers with whom the Sublime Porte is in 
relations of friendship, inviting them to accede thereto. 


ARTICLE IY. 


The present Convention shall be ratified, and the ratifications thereof 
shall be exchanged at London at the expiration of months, or sooner 
if possible. 

In faith whereof the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the same, 
and have affixed thereunto the seals of their arms. 


Done at London, the in the year of our Lord 
one thousand eight hundred and forty-one. 
(Initialed) KE. N, 
B 
RB; 
B. 
B. 
C. 
No. 184, 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received March 16.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, February 16, 1841. 

I HAVE the honour to inclose copy of my Official Note in answer 
to the Official Note dated the 13th instant, which I received from the 
Sublime Porte. 


Inclosure in No. 184. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Rechid Pasha. 


Therapia, February 15, 1841. 


THE Undersigned, &c., had yesterday the honour to receive an 
Official Note* from the Sublime Porte dated the 13th instant, transmitted 
to him by his Excellency the Ottoman Minister for Foreign Affairs, 
together with a copy of two firmans, the one containing the conditions 
annexed by the Sublime Porte to the grant made to Mehemet Ali of the 
hereditary Government of Egypt; the other containing the grant to 
Mehemet Ali of the Government of the Provinces of Nubia, Darfour, 
Kordufan, and Sennaar, and also a letter from the Grand Vizier to Mehemet 
Ali, all being dated the 13th of the month. 

The Undersigned immediately forwarded the afore-mentioned papers 
to Her Britannic Majesty’s Government, to which it belongs to reply to 
the wishes expressed by the Sublime Porte respecting the renewed aid to 
be afforded to the Ottoman Government in the event of a refusal by 
Mehemet Ali, to obey the orders of his Sovereign cunveyed in the 
firman. 

The Undersigned must take notice of one paragraph in the Official 
Note he had the honour to receive from the Sublime Porte, because it does 
not quite correctly state the circumstances to which it adverts. [It states, 
“En outre, la Sublime Porte, ainsi qu’il est connu a votre Excellence, a 
agi, depuis le commencement de la Question Egyptienne, d’apres l’avis et 
les conseils des Quatre Augustes Cours, ses amies et alliées.” 

The fact is, that the firman which contains the conditions upon which 
His Imperial Majesty the Sultan grants the hereditary Government of 
Egypt to Mehemet Ali was not prepared with the advice and counsel of 
the Four Courts, the friends and allies of the Sultan ; for that firman was 
prepared and perfected by the Ottoman Government without the knowledge 
of the Undersigned, who is recognized by the Sublime Porte as the Repre- 
sentative of the British Government in this country. 


* See Inclosure 5 in No. 172. 


326 


His Excellency the Ottoman Minister for Foreign Affairs did notify to 
the Undersigned his Excellency’s intention to communicate to the Under- 
signed a plan his Excellency had in consideration for the settlement of the 
Egyptian Question, but his Excellency did not make any such communi- 
cation to the Undersigned. The papers mentioned in the Official Note 
were not given to the Dragoman of the British Embassy till after the 
measure had been decided, and the formal execution of it completed, and 
ordered to be sent to Alexandria within a few hours; that is, before the 
Undersigned could by any means have cognizance of them. The Under- 
signed, therefore, disclaims all responsibility whatever for the measures 
detailed in the firman containing the conditions. 

The Undersigned feels a most anxious desire that the arrangement 
which the Sublime Porte has been pleased to make, may have the happy 
effect of terminating the long-agitated Question of Egypt. 

; The Undersigned, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No. 185. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received March 16.) 


My Lord, Therapia, February 17, 1841. 
I HAVE the honour to inclose herewith copy of instructions which 
have been drawn up for his Excellency Said Muhib Effendi, the Commis- 
sioner sent lately by the Sublime Porte to Alexandria; also copy of a 
firman which his Excellency was charged to deliver to Mehemet Ali 
Pasha. 
I have this moment received the above papers. 
Lhave, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 185. 


[See Inclosure 1 in No. 172.] 


Inclosure 2 in No. 185. 


[See Inclosure 7 in No. 172.] 


No. 186. 
Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, March 16, 1841. 


I TRANSMIT to your Excellency a copy of a Note* which the Pleni- 
potentiaries of Great Britain, Austria, Prussia, and Russia, addressed to 
Chekib Effendi on the 13th instant, with reference to a communication 
made by him to the Conference on the 11th instant, of the Hatti-Sheriffs, 
issued by the Sultan on the 13th of February, specifying the conditions 
annexed by the Sultan to the grant to Mehemet Ali of the hereditary 
Pashalic of Egypt. 

You will observe, that in that Note allusion is made to questions 
which may arise, as to the interpretation of parts of the Hatti-Sheriffs ; 
and the Plenipotentiaries state, that those questions will find their solu- 


* See No. 174. 


tion upon reference being made to the Note, addressed by the Plenipoten- 
tiaries to Chekib Effendi on the 30th of January. 

The principal question, to which allusion is thus made by the 
Plenipotentiaries, is that which might arise out of the wording of the ‘first 
Article of the Hatti-Sheriff, which specifies the conditions to be imposed 
upon Mehemet Ali. The wording of that Article might lead to the 
supposition, that the Sultan intended to reserve to himself to choose upon 
each vacancy in the Pashalic of Egypt, any one of the descendants of 
Mehemet Ali, without regard to any fixed rule whatever; and that thus 
the principle of hereditary tenure would be rendered illusory. 

Her Majesty’s Government conceive, that this was by no means the 
intention of the Porte, and that what was meant to be established by the 
condition above-mentioned is, that while, on the one hand, the Sultan 
grants to the descendants of Mehemet Ali in the direct male line, here- 
ditary succession in the Pashalic of Egypt, the Sultan reserves his own 
Sovereign rights intact, by declaring, that those descendants shall not 
succeed as a matter of course and of inherent right, as would be the case 
with the Rulers of an independent State, but shall each in turn receive 
his appointment from the Sultan, and by a separate act of the Sultan’s 
Sovereign power. 

[f this is a correct view of the meaning of the Article in question, 
there can be no difficulty on the part of the Porte in giving such an 
explanation thereof as will remove all misunderstandings ; and the Porte 
might say, that it is the intention of the Sultan that this right of selection 
shall in all cases be exercised in favour of the next male heir to the 
deceased Pasha, unless, by infancy or by physical incapacity, such male 
heir should be incapable of taking charge of the administration of the 
province, in which case the person next in relationship to the deceased 
Pasha would be appointed in his stead. The Sultan might, at the same 
time, make it to be clearly understood, that it is his intention that 
Ibrahim shall succeed to Mehemet. 

Her Majesty’s Government have been informed, that Mehemet Ali 
has made representations to the Porte upon two other points,—the amount 
of tribute, and the degree of military and naval rank up to which he is 
to be allowed to make appointments and promotions in the forces main- 
tained in Egypt. 

The first is a question of account upon which, no doubt, an under- 
standing will be come to between the parties. And the Four Powers 
purposely abstained from entering into that question, in framing the 
Separate Act of the Treaty of July, because they felt that they had no 
information which could enable them to judge what would be the proper 
amount for such tribute. 

The second question also seems to be one about which it cannot be 
difficult to come to an understanding. It is necessary to maintain the 
principle, that all the military and naval appointments and commissions 
emanate originally from the Sovereign power of the State; but it seems a 
matter of less importance to determine up to what degree of rank the 
selection of individuals for promotion shall be left by the Sultan to the 
discretion of the Pasha of the province. 

There is, in this respect, great diversity in the practice of different 
countries. In some, all appointments from the lowest to the highest are 
made by the direct selection and act of the Crown; in other countries the 
Crown invariably, and as an established rule, takes the recommendation 
of Generals in local command, as to appointments and promotions up to 
various degrees of rank. The important thing is, that each officer, high 
or low, should know and understand that he is in the service of the Sove- 
reign, and not merely in that of the Provincial aie 

am, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


328 | 
No. 187. 


Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received March 17.) __, 


(Extract.) Paris, March 15, 1841. 

M. GUIZOT?’S despatch of last Saturday to the Baron de Bourqueney 
has been, I imagine, already communicated to your Lordship, and will 
have apprized you, that, although full powers have not yet been sent 
to the French Chargé d’Affaires, he is authorised to initial the pro- 
posed Bosphorus Convention. M. Guizot said to me to-day, that the 
alterations which the Representatives of the Allied Powers had consented 
to make in the papers submitted to the French Government were satis- 
factory ; and if the Turco-Egyptian Question had been settled, (the settle- 
ment-of which was the basis of the proposition made to France,) full 
powers would have been sent to Baron de Bourqueney to sign imme- 
diately the Convention; but, under the existing circumstances, when 
conditions were imposed on Mehemet Ali by the Sultan, which the Pasha 
deemed to be inconsistent with what had been held out to him, if not 
positively promised by the Allies, and which he had in consequence 
refused, when it was unknown whether the Allies would assist the Sultan 
in enforcing those conditions, or use their influence at Constantinople to 
modify the conditions of the Hatti-Sheriff, and, in case of failing to 
obtain this object, would leave the Sultan and his Vassal to settle as they 
could their difference; it was impossible for the French Government to 
do more than authorise its Representative in London to initial the 
Convention. | nN I 

In giving this authority, he considered the French Government as 
entering into a positive engagement to sign the Convention, as soon as 
the Turco-Egyptian Question was really concluded. 


No. 188. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received March 18.) ~ 


(Extract.) Therapia, February 19, 1841. 
THE Turkish steamer that carried the firman with the conditions im- 
posed by the Porte on Mehemet Ali, may reach Alexandria this day or 
aay It is not expected that an answer will arrive here under ten 
ays. ; 
I forwarded by the Vienna Post copy of my. Official Note to the 
Porte, in my despatch of the 16th instant. I inclose the answer Rechid 
Pasha made to the Dragoman, when he presented my Official Note. — 


Inclosure in No. 188. 


M. F. Pisani to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Pera, le 18 Fevrier, 1841. 
J’AT remis hier matin a son Excellence Réchid Pacha une traduction 
Frangaise de la Note de votre Excellence avec Voriginal. Cela a fait 
quelque peine 4 Réchid. Il m’a parlé dans les termes suivans. “J espé- 
rais que son Kxcellence serait trés-contente de ce que nous avons fait 
Lord Ponsonby a dit dans la Conférence qu’il était d’accord avec ses 
Collégues sur tous les points excepté sur Article du Tribut. Ce que la 
Porte a fait 4 cet égard lui a paru concilier les deux opinions. J’ai dit A 
la vérité que je communiquerais confidentiellement une copie du firman a 
Lord Ponsonby, mais je n’ai pas pu le faire, parceque le projet était entre 
Han ance dese genre S a arnc LaTCR HL GR pe 
se de Micie] aux Quatre Représentans, et 
de Vexpédier A Alexandrieen original.”” Réchid a fini par protester de son 
profond respect pour votre Excellence. 
Je suis, &c., 
(Signé) F. PISANI. 


329 


(Translation.) 


My Lord, Pera, February 18, 1841. 


I DELIVERED yesterday morning to his Excellency Rechid Pasha a 
French translation of your Excellency’s note with the original. It occa- 
sioned some pain to Rechid. He spoke to me in the following terms : “I 
hoped that his Excellency would be well satisfied with what we have done. 
Lord Ponsonby said in the Conference that he was agreed with his col- 
leagues on all the points except that of the tribute. What the Porte has 
done in that respect, appeared to it to reconcile the two opinions. I said 
indeed that I would communicate to Lord Ponsonby confidentially a copy 
of the firman, but I was unable to do so, because the draft was in the 
hands of the Sultan, and it was only sent back to me with His Highness’s 
order to communicate it officially to the Four Representatives, and to send 
it in original to Alexandria.” Rechid finished by protesting his profound 
respect for your Excellency. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) Fk. PISANI. 


- No. 189. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewed March 18.) 


(Extract.) ! Therapia, February 21, 1841. 


THE last accounts from Alexandria, by the French steamer, state 
that Mehemet Ali is carrying on his preparations for war, and it is to be 
remarked that he was making those preparations after he knew that the 
hereditary Government of Egypt had been granted to him, and before the 
conditions to be annexed to that Grant had been notified to him, or 
determined upon here. 


No. 190. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received March 18.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, February 21, 1841. 

I REQUESTED Colonel Rose to set down in writing what he had 
seen and heard in Syria, and he has been good enough to comply with my 
request, and to furnish me with a report, which I have the greatest pleasure 
in transmitting to your Lordship, thinking it to be extremely well 
worth your attention. 


Inclosure in No. 190. 
Colonel Rose to Viscount Ponsonby. 


(Extract.) Therapia, February 20, 1841. 


THE despatches from Colonel Bridgeman will have made your Lord- 
ship acquainted with the numbers and description of the force which 
Ibrahim Pasha takes out of Syria, I will not therefore weary your Lord- 
ship with a repetition. With respect to the Syrians in his army, the 3rd 
Regiment of Guards and the Battalion of Riflemen are composed of them. 
They are both very much reduced by desertion, the former by the last 
accounts to 500 or 600 men, (the other regiments of the Guards being 
1,500 strong,) and the latter to 250 men. ‘The tendency of the Syrians to 
desert was so great, that during the march from Tafyle to Gaza, [brahim 
Pasha caused an Egyptian regiment to bivouac round the Syrian Riflemen 
in order to prevent their desertion. The Bedouins behaved very ill in 
plundering and stripping the ea : if they had not thus checked the 


330 


desertion, there is no saying to what extent it might have gone. In 
one little village in the mountains near Hebron, where I was, there were 
alone fifty deserters, all nearly naked and starving. | 

There are a great many Syrians in the Egyptian cavalry. I should 
think, that in all, 4,000 or 5,000 Syrians must have left their country 
with Ibrahim Pasha: Your Lordship is aware that Captain Houston 
Stewart and myself did our utmost to induce the Egyptian military 
authorities, Ahmed Dramanli Pasha and Mahmoud Bey at Gaza, to leave 
behind the Syrian soldiers, Mehemet Ali having given up all authority 
over their country, and ordered its evacuation by his son; they said that 
they could not possibly do so without orders. I suggested that they might 
at least leave a return of their numbers, as the different regiments left 
Gaza, extracted from their regimental books: this they consented to. I 
left Gaza the next day in search of Ibrahim Pasha, but I understand from 
Colonel Alderson, who is superintending the evacuation at Gaza, that the 
Egyptians sent him the returns of Syrians in two regiments of cavalry, 
amounting the one to thirty-five, and the other to thirty-six; but neither 
Colonel Alderson nor myself consider these numbers correct. Your 
Lordship is aware of the answer given by Mehemet Ali to the application 
for the restoration of the Syrians to their country; which, as well as I 
remember, was to the following effect: “That his delivery of the Syrians 
serving in his army would follow on that of the Egyptians taken from 
him.” However, as I did not see the document, I do not speak with 
certainty on this point. 

When I came up with Ibrahim Pasha’s column, there were two lines 
of videttes flanking it towards the Syrian side,—mounted and dismounted 
cavalry—to prevent desertion. I rode for several miles along the column, 
which was in great disorder—in fact it was quite broken up; groups of 
men in two and threes, some armed, some not, others hardly able to 
walk. I saw two standards, one without any escort, the other with a 
guard of two men: they must have belonged to battalions which had 
been broken up on account of their casualties. Ibrahim Pasha’s own 
horses had had no barley that day; the troops had been three days without 
water, and had subsisted chiefly on mule and donkey: flesh, which sold at 
a high price: 200 determined cavalry might have swept away all that 
part of the column which I saw (I entered it at about two-thirds of its 
length), with great ease. 

Ibrahim Pasha did not appear pleased when I gave him Mehemet 
Alvis letter. He was agitated, and it took him five minutes to read it, 
although it only consisted of four lines. Whilst he was thus employed, 
his camel-rider and chief groom were also endeavouring to read it over 
hisshoulder. I rode with him for about four hours, and accompanied him 
to Gaza; he spoke with considerable bitterness of the Turks. He said, 
“Why have you turned out the Seraskier*?” I said that the Turkish 
Government had, I believed, recalled him, because they were not satisfied 
with his conduct. He answered, “Oh! they are all alike; they smoke all 
day, and have people to wash their hands.” I said, “ The present 
Seraskier is a very good man and soldier.’ “Oh yes,” he replied, 
“as long as he is in the saddle; as soon as he sits down he will rob like 
the rest’—on which he laughed very much. “Jam the only man,” he 
said, “to manage the Arabs and Bedouins, who never had any master 
before me. I could and did cut off their heads, which the Turks never 
will do. Lord Palmerston from London, and Lord Ponsonby from Con- 
stantinople, will have to come here to manage Syria.” I said, that 
certainly they had done so much without coming to the country, that 
there was no knowing what they might effect, were they actually to 
do so. He did not look pleased. It appeared to me that he was either 
affecting high spirits, or that he had been drinking too much. He drank 
frequently from a bottle which hung in front of his saddle, and I was 
informed by an Egyptian Colonel of Artillery that it was filled with 
claret. He talked and laughed constantly with his servants. He is now 


* Izzet Pasha. 


ee 


“Sat 


suffering under a very bad attack of the jaundice, his eyes and head being 
quite yellow. ; 

_His reception at Gaza was remarkable; the people flocked from 
curiosity to see him, but his entry formed a singular contrast to that of 
the Turkish troops into the different towns and villages which they had 
occupied for the first time. In the latter case, the reception was enthu- 
siastic, the men lining the roads and saluting us with all the varieties of 
an Eastern welcome, and the women crowding the house-tops and making 
with their tongues that extraordinary noise which is meant to denote 
extreme pleasure; but with Ibrahim Pasha, there was a look of deep- 
rooted dislike on the faces of the people, which even their dread of him 
could not conceal. He, contrary to the Eastern fashion, saluted no one,— 
not one saluted him; certainly, as an inhabitant afterwards said to me, 
‘Not a tongue nor a heart blessed him.” 


No. 191. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received March 18.) 


My Lord, - Therapia, February 22, 1841. 


I HAVE received from Mr. Consul Moore accounts of violent 
outrages committed by the Albanian troops in Syria, and very great dis- 
orders by some Turkish troops also. I have sent the details to the Porte, 
and called upon it in the strongest manner to take immediate measures 
to remedy the evil. I suggested the recall from Syria of the Albanians 
‘without delay, saying that they were no longer necessary there, in con- 
pee User of the state of Ibrahim’s army, and possibly of that Chief 

imself. 

I have desired the Dragoman to tell the Minister, that if there was 
any delay in taking the necessary remedial measures, I should think it my 
duty to bring the matter before the Porte in a more public and more offi- 
cial manner, in order to save the Sultan and the general cause from the 
dangers to which all are exposed by the misconduct of the troops. 

The Porte will see in the documents I have sent in, that the French 
Agents in Syria are active in endeavouring to take advantage of the 
misconduct of these troops, and to induce an insurrection against the 
Porte; and it will also see the account of the alarm existing even amongst 
the Turks, the natives at Beyrout. 

| I have, &c.,— 


(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No. 192. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—{ Received March 23.) 


My Lord, Therapia, February 23, 1841. 


I TRANSMIT copy of one of General Jochmus’s despatches to 
Admiral Sir Robert Stopford, that I may insure its being known to your 
Lordship, as it affords information essential to a correct judgment of the 
affairs of this country. 

It is shown in the Despatch, that had it not been for the perseverance 
of General Jochmus in taking measures against Ibrahim Pasha, it would 
have been easy for Ibrahim to remain with his army in Damascus until, 
the arrangement with Mehemet Ali having been completed, he might have 
retreated with a great unbroken force to Egypt, instead of having his 
army defeated and nearly destroyed, and wholly demoralized. _ 

Had Ibrahim remained at Damascus, the military question would 
have been undecided, and it would have been easy to assert, that victory 
might still have been on the side of the Pasha, had Mehemet Ali thought 
it politic to continue the war. 

If Ibrahim had taken back to Egypt his large army unharmed, Mche- 

| a Une 


332 


met Ali would possess a force that might encourage him to resist, and 
might possibly make him stronger than ever. The energy of General Joch- 
mus has rendered all doubt and delusion on the subject of the military 
question impossible, and has shown, that under able command the Turkish 
troops are more than a match for the Egyptian army and General; 
his energy has also taken from Mehemet Ali the best means he could 
have to support resistance, and therefore has afforded the best ground 
for hoping he will submit. 

All this good is due to the energy of General Jochmus. The praises 
General Jochmus gives to those who have done good service, are proofs 
of his honourable and just feelings. 
; I have, &c. 


(Signed) PONSONBY. 


LS 


Inclosure in No. 192. 


[See Sub-Inclosure 28 in No. 175.] 


No. 193. 
Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received March 21.) 


Extract.) Paris, March 19, 1841. 
I RECEIVED yesterday your Lordship’s despatch of the 16th 


instant, with its important inclosures. 

I have seen the President of the Council and the Minister for 
Foreign Affairs, since they learnt that the draft of Convention between 
Great Britain, Austria, France, Prussia, and Russia, on the one part, and 
the Sublime Porte on the other, had been provisionally agreed to by the 
respective Plenipotentiaries of these Powers. The Ministers expressed 
to me the greatest satisfaction at the prospect thus afforded of an end 
being speedily put to that state of agitation regarding the affairs of the 
East, which had during some years disquieted the world and placed in 
jeopardy the peace of Europe. 


No. 194. 
Colonel Bridgeman to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received March 22.) 


British Head-Quarters, Ji affa, 
My Lord, February 19, 1841. 

I HAVE the honour to report to your Lordship the entire evacuation 
this day of the territories of His Imperial Highness the Sultan, by the 
Egyptian army. 

As by the inclosed report of Lieutenant-Colonel Alderson, who 
has this moment returned from Gaza,—having been employed there, since 
the cessation of hostilities, to see the evacuation duly carried into effect,— 
it appears that 34,000 men have either marched or embarked, the 
force with which Ibrahim Pasha reached that place must have amounted 
to 30,000 men, the original garrison having consisted of about 4,000, A 
column also under Solyman Pasha, which consisted of 3,000 or 4.000 men 
marched to Egypt by the Desert road. The force, therefore, with ‘Which 
Ibrahim Pasha marched from Damascus, could not have been less than 
40,000 men, as his losses in the Desert are known to have been ver 
severe. On the 5th instant, (as I stated in my last despatch it was ae 
intention to do,) I proceeded to Gaza, returning here on the 10th, havin 
personally assured myself, in my interviews with Ibrahim Pasha that he 
was no less anxious to hasten, than we were to induce, his departure 
He had recovered the effects of his harassing retreat, and benefited b 
the prescriptions of Assistant-Surgeon Robertson, of Her Majesty’s fie 


333 


“‘ Benbow,” who had been sent to Gaza, Ibrahim Pasha having expressed 
a wish to consult an English medical officer. 

_. The Convention, Iam happy to assure your Lordship, has been effected 
with much reciprocal courtesy and good faith, and both Turkish and 
Egyptian Authorities have evinced all possible reliance on British media- 
tion, and acquiesced in allour proposals and arrangements. I feel parti- 
cularly obliged to the Seraskier Pasha for his courtesy and attention to 
my suggestions. The discharge of the Syrian soldiers serving in the 
Egyptian army, was the only question upon which any difficulty arose. 
On the 25th of January, Captain Stewart being then at Gaza, found, that 
although no mention thereof was made in Commodore Sir Charles 
Napier’s communication to Brigadier-General Michell, (a copy of which 
I had the honour to transmit to your Lordship, in my despatch of the 
26th of January,) the Turkish Authorities as earnestly insisted on the 
point, as the Egyptians decidedly refused to concede it. That there 
might not, however, be any consequent delay in the evacuation, it was 
agreed that the Syrians should accompany their regiments to Egypt, and 
that (should it be hereafter.so decided) they should all be sent back to this 
country free of expence; and the Seraskier and others of his Council 
assured me, that they considered this a better course than to risk an in- 
terruption of the evacuation, pending further negotiation or reference. 

Captain Stewart, however, immediately despatched the ‘“ Hecate” 
steamer from Gaza to Alexandria, to communicate with Commodore Sir 
Charles Napier on the subject. . 

The “Stromboli” steamer returned thence forthwith, bringing intelli- 
gence that Commodore Napier was at Cairo, but that Captain Ward, 
commanding the “ Hecate,” had had an interview with Mehemet Ali, who 
had assured him that it had been arranged and agreed five days pre- 
viously, between himself, the Turkish Commissioner Mazloum Bey, and 
Commodore Napier, that the Syrian conscripts should remain with their 
regiments until their arrival in Egypt, when they would be exchanged for 
the Egyptians remaining in Candia, the Hedjaz, and at Constantinople. 
Thus the matter rested, but by a subsequent letter received from Commo- 
dore Napier by Captain Stewart, it appears that Mehemet Ali had mis- 
represented the facts, and that it had been decided to permit of the 
discharge of the Syrians at Gaza. 

The Seraskier Pasha and the head-quarters of the Turkish army 
being already on their return to Beyrout, | have considered it advisable 
to remove thither the head-quarters of the British forces and the Royal 
Artillery,* &c., Captain Stewart having provided conveyance in Her Ma- 
jesty’s steam vessels “ Vesuvius” and “ Hecate.” Their removal is indeed 
rendered the more necessary, some cases of plague having appeared 
amongst the Turkish troops of this garrison, the report of which your Lord- 
ship will find in the inclosed letter from the Inspector-General of Hospitals, 
Dr. Robertson, who arrived here from Acre on the 7th inst. At Tyre the 
plague has also broken out to some considerable extent, and sanatory 
regulations have been established there, as well as at this place. ‘There 
was one case a short time ago at Sidon, which ended fatally, but the dis- 
ease had not extended further.’ No British soldier has been attacked, and 
I have not failed to adopt every possible precaution for their security. 
The Egyptian army having thus finally retired, and the Seraskier Pasha, 
Lieutenant-General Jochmus, and others of the Turkish Authorities hav- 
ing quitted the town at the commencement of the week, my presence is no 
longer necessary, and I am at liberty to proceed on my overland journey 
to Beyrout. I shall however, before returning there, visit several places 
from as far south as the Dead Sea, that I may make myself acquainted 
with the features of the country, and personally ascertain the feelings and 
disposition of the inhabitants. I hope to reach Beyrout about the 5th of 
next month. A few more cases of plague have been reported, (in the 


* Royal Artillery :—2 Lieutenant-Colonels, 2 Subalterns, 2 Serjeants, 54 Rank and File. 
Royal Engineers and Royal Sappers and Miners :—1 Ticutenant-Colonel, 2 Subalterns, 1 Ser- 
jeant, 21 Rank and File. 


334 


hospital,) since the date of Dr. Robertson’s letter, and in one or two in- 
stances amongst inhabitants of the town; but as all the British troops 
have embarked, my apprehensions on their account are at an end. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) EK. H. BRIDGEMAN, 


Colonel commanding the British Force in Syria. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 194. 
[See Sub-Inclosure 50 in No. 175.] 


Inclosure 2 in No. 194. 
Dr. Robertson to Colonel Bridgeman. 


Sir, Jaffa, February 13, 1841. 


I HAVE the honour to report, that in obedience to your order, I 
this morning visited the Turkish Military Hospital, to inspect some cases 
of supposed plague. I found three men labouring under disease which 
{ am decidedly of opinion is plague, and there are several others with 
suspicious symptoms. These men were admitted into hospital from this 
garrison ; there is therefore reason to suppose that the disease may further 
develope itself among the troops in Jaffa. 

To prevent if possible the extension of the complaint, I have recom- 
mended that the Turkish troops be removed to a camp outside of the 
town. 

_ I beg to suggest that it is advisable that the British troops should be 
confined to their quarters. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) JOHN ROBERTSON, M.D. 
Deputy-Inspector-General. 


No. 195. 
Viscount Palmerston to Colonel Bridgeman. 


Sir, Foreign Office, March 25, 1841. 


I HAVE received your despatch of the 26th of January, contain- 
ing an account of the various operations which had been carried 
on from the 31st of December, the date of Brigadier-General Michell’s 
last despatch, until the death of that officer; and [ have to acquaint you 
that Her Majesty’s Government approve what was done during that 
interval. | 

Lam, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 196. 
Viscount Palmerston to Earl Granville. 


My Lord, » Foreign Office, March 26, 1841. 

I INCLOSE to your Excellency, for your information, copies of a 
despatch* and of its inclosures which I have received from Her Majesty’s 
Ambassador at Constantinople, containing the substance of the conditions 
to be imposed on Mehemet Ali, as they were read to the Representatives 
of the Four Powers on the 4th of February last. 


* See No. 162. 


339 


Your Excellency will perceive from this despatch, that the arrange- 
ment relative to the succession of Mehemet Ali’s descendants, as stated 
in the firman of the 13th of February, is in substance the same as the 
arrangement stated in the Memorandum of the 4th of February ; and 
your Excellency will see, that this latter arrangement was unanimously 
agreed to by all those Four Representatives. From this it seems to 
be clear, that the arrangement stated in the firman could not have been 
intended as a mode of evading the fulfilment of the promise made to 
Mehemet Ali upon this subject, because it is impossible to suppose that 
the. Four Representatives would have given their assent to such a 
scheme. 

_ I have at the same time to add, that private accounts from Constan- 
tinople state, that the firmans of the 13th of February were drawn up 
by the Turkish Government in concert with the Austrian Internuncio, and 
without communication with the whole of the Four Representatives. 

Iam, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 197. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received March 29.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, February 25, 1841. 


SOME short time ago Baron de Stiirmer proposed that we should 
consult about making regulations for the settlement of Syria. I replied, 
that it was a subject of great magnitude, requiring strict examination 
into facts and mature deliberation, and that I should think it best to see 
our situation more clearly before we acted. I am very unwilling to 
act upon this matter without your Lordship’s directions so to do, until 
after I shall have satisfied myself, that the real interests and welfare 
of the Syrians and of the Porte are to be promoted by the measures that 
may be proposed. I have written to Syria to procure from thence state- 
ments of the precise nature of the old institutions of that country, and°for 
information whether or not the people generally were well content with 
those institutions, and how they could be altered or modified so as to 
produce satisfaction and security against the abuses of authority. I have 
pointed to the Hatti-Sheriff as a rule that may be useful to consult, and 
as a security for the legality of the assertion of known rights. I have asked 
for information respecting taxes, &c. &c. 


No. 198. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received March 29.) 


My Lord, | Therapia, February 27, 1841. 


THE French steamer brought me yesterday despatches from Sir 
Edmund Lyons, communicating the measures adopted by himself and the 
Austrian and Prussian Ministers, in consequence of the discovery of plans 
(in part executed) of certain Candiotes, for raising disturbances in the 
Island of Candia. 

I immediately informed the Ottoman Minister for Foreign Affairs of 
the facts, and I at the same time acquainted him that two British ships 
of the line, the “ Vanguard” and the “ Hastings,” were probably already 
in the port of that island: the above being intelligence I received the 
day before yesterday, from Captain Austin of Her Majesty’s steam frigate: 
‘“¢ Cyclops,” who arrived here bringing your Lordship’s despatches. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


P. S.—The French steamer has not brought any news from Alexan- 
dria, nor have I heard of any. 


EEO as 


336 


No. 199. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received March 30.) 


(Extract.) Therapta, March 2, 1841. 


I HAVE just received a letter from Mr. Consul Ongley, dated Canea, 
February 15. 

He says, “ Letters from Syria state that ammunition had been pur- 
chased there, and shipped on board a vessel which was to have left Syra, 
for Candia, on the 13th of February.” He adds:—“ It is reported that 
700 men (Creto-Hellenes) are to come, and that affairs are certainly in a 
critical situation.” 

The above-stated facts respecting the ammunition being procured, 
and the Creto-Hellenes preparing to act, seem to corroborate what Sir 
Edmund Lyons has reported. 

I have communicated to the Porte the information relating to the 
ammunition being shipped at Syra, and the supposed arrival in Candia 
of the Creto-Hellenes. 


No. 200. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received March 26.) 


My Lord, Therapia, March 3, 1841. 

I MENTIONED in a late despatch my having recommended to the 
Sublime Porte the removal of the Albanian troops from Syria, on account 
of their extreme misconduct there; I have now to report, that the Porte 


has determined to remove them. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No. 201. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received March 30.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, March 6, 1841. 

I INCLOSE a Report to me from the Dragoman, in reply to my 
inquiries. I have seen two private letters that corroborate what is stated 
in the Report. 


Inclosure in No. 201. 
M. F. Pisani to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Péra, le 6 Mars, 1841. 


LES nouvelles d’Alexandrie ne sont pas favorables. Muhib Effendi 
est resté a Alexandrie. I] a envoyé ici un long rapport et une lettre de 
Méhémet Ali au Grand Vizir. Ces deux piéces ont été envoyées au Sultan. 
Réchid m’a dit qu’aussitét qu’il les aura, il m’en donnera des copies. 
Méhémet Ali a rejeté les principaux points: savoir, la succession au 
Pachalic doit se faire sur la base fixée que l’ainé de la famille sera le suc- 
cesseur, et cela peut étre le frére, et non pas le fils, du Pacha décédé. Le 
méme systéme est suivi dans la dynastie Ottomane. 

Les institutions de Gulhané ne sont pratiquables en Egypte. 

La quatriéme partie des revenus est trop. 

Point de Muhassil. 

Toutes les stipulations entre la Porte et les Puissances étrangéres ne 
sont pas applicables 4 Egypte. 


337 


Voila, dit Réchid, 4 peu prés ce que j'ai compris en donnant un coup 
d’ceil sur la lettre de Méhémet Ali, 
Je retourne 4 la Porte pour tacher d’avoir la copie de cette lettre, qui 
jette une nouvelle phase sur l’affaire Turco-Egyptienne. 
Je suis, &c., 
(Signé) F. PISANI. 


: (Translation.) 
My Lord, | Pera, March 6, 1841. 

THE news from Alexandria are not favourable. Muhib Effendi has 
remained at Alexandria. He has sent here a long report and a letter from 
Mehemet Ali to the Grand Vizier. These two documents have been sent 
to the Sultan. Rechid told me that as soon as he shall have them, he will 
give me copies of them. Mehemet Ali has rejected the principal points ; 
that is to say, the succession to the Pashalic is to take place on the fixed 
basis that the eldest of the family shall be the successor, and that may be 
the brother, and not the son, of the deceased Pasha. The same system is 
followed in the Ottoman dynasty. 

The institutions of Gulhané are not practicable in Egypt. 

The fourth part of the revenues is too much. 

No Muhassil. 

All the stipulations between the Porte and foreign Powers are not 
applicable to Egypt. : 

“This,” said Rechid Pasha, “is about what I have understood on 
casting a glance over Mehemet Ali’s letter.” | 

I am returning to the Porte in order to endeavour to have a copy of 
this letter, which produces a new aspect in the Turco-Egyptian affair. 

have, &c., 


(Signed) F, PISANI. 


No. 202. 


Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, March 30, 1841. 


I HAVE received your Excellency’s despatch of the 6th of March, 
by which it appears that. the Porte had received intelligence from 
Alexandria that Mehemet Ali objected to certain of the conditions 
attached to the firmans, issued by the Porte on the 13th of February, for 
regulating the future Government of Kgypt. 

With reference to the several objections’ which, according to M. 
Pisani’s report to your Excellency, Mehemet Ali has offered to these 
conditions, I have to observe to your Excellency, that with regard to the 
order of succession in the Pashalic of Egypt, there seems no objection to 
the Porte fixing it now beforehand, subject to variation in cases of 
infancy or physical incapacity; but the principle should be maintained. 
that the appointment of each successive Pasha shall be a separate act of 
the Sovereign authority of the Sultan, as stated in the Note addressed by 
the Plenipotentiaries of the Four Powers to Chekib Effendi, on the 30th of 
January. 

As to the Hatti Sheriff of Gulhané, and the Treaties of the Porte 
with Foreign Powers, they must necessarily be carried into execution in 
Egypt. With regard to the amount of tribute to be hereafter paid by 
Mehemet Ali, that seems to be a matter of account, which must be 
determined according to the result of accurate statements of the net 
revenue of Egypt; of the aggregate cost of all the establishments, civil, 
military, and naval; and of the amount of surplus which is to be divided 
between the Sultan and the Pasha, in the shape of tribute for the 
former, and of means of maintenance for the latter. 

I am, &c., 
(Signed) - PALMERSTON. 


9M 


338 


No. 203. 
Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, March 30, 1841. 


I HAVE received your Excellency’s despatch of the 25th of 
February, reporting what had passed between yourself and the Intere 
nuncio, on the subject of the regulations to be established by the Porte 
for the future Government of Syria, and stating that you had deemed it 
advisable, before taking any steps with the Porte on this matter, to 
obtain from Syria full information on which to form your opinion; and I 
have to state to your Excellency, that Her Majesty’s Government entirely 
approve the course you propose to pursue. 

The first step towards forming or suggesting a plan for the future, 
is to obtain full and accurate information as to the past. 

I am, &c., 


(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 204. 
Viscount Palmerston to Colonel Bridgeman. 


Sir, | Foreign Office, March 30, 1841. 


I HAVE received your despatch of the 19th of February, reporting 
the complete evacuation of Syria by the Egyptian forces. 

Her Majesty’s Government have learnt with great satisfaction this 
successful termination of the contest which has been carried on in that 
country; and they are fully sensible of the services which the officers 
and men of Her Majesty’s forces, employed on shore, have rendered in 
the execution of the measures which have led to this result. Her 
Majesty’s Government are especially pleased with the exertions of Her 
Majesty’s officers to prevent any unnecessary loss of life which might 
have arisen from the mutual distrust of the contending parties; and they 
feel confident that the intercourse which Her Majesty’s officers have had 
with the Turkish and Egyptian troops, will induce both parties to enter- 
tain the most favourable opinion of the British army. 

I have to instruct you to acquaint the officers and men under your 
command, that Her Majesty’s Government fully approve their conduct 
throughout the military operations which preceded the evacuation of 
Syria; and are equally persuaded that their conduct during the short 
time they may still remain in that country, will continue to be honourable 
to themselves and advantageous to the public service. 

Iam, &c., 


(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 205, 
Viscount Palmerston to the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty. 


My Lords, Foreign Office, March 30, 1841. 
I HAVE had under my consideration the letter of your Lordships’ 
Secretary of the 12th of March, inclosing copies of two despatches from 
Admiral Sir Robert Stopford, dated the 28th of February and the Ist of 
March, the former reporting the evacuation of Syria by the Egyptian 
troops. 
Mer Majesty’s Government duly appreciate the zeal and activity 


339 


shown by the officers and men of Her Majesty’s squadron on the coast of 
Syria, during the operations which preceded the evacuation of Syria; 
and I would suggest to your Lordships, that Sir Robert ‘Stopford should 
be directed to acquaint Captain Stewart of Her Majesty’s ship “ Ben- 
bow,” the commanding officer on the Syrian coast, that Her Majesty’s 
Government approve his conduct during the late transactions, and have 
received with much satisfaction his report of the zealous exertions of the 
officers and men of Her Majesty’s fleet serving under his immediate 
command. 
Iam, &c., 


(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 206. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received April 2.) 


My Lord, Therapia, March 6, 1841. 


I INCLOSE a letter I have received from Mr. Wood, reporting the 
steps taken to put an end to the evils occasioned by the Albanians in 
Syria. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure in No. 206. 


Mr. Wood to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Beyrout, February 22, 1841. 


I HAVE the honour to state to your Lordship, that in consequence 
of the information transmitted by Mr. Moore to head-quarters at Jaffa of 
the proceedings of the Albanian troops on their march from Tripoli to 
Beyrout, which had forced the mountaineers to arm themselves at dif- 
ferent points for the defence of their villages, and of the consequent alarm 
that it had created in the minds of the people, his Excellency the 
Seraskier Pasha and myself repaired to Beyrout to examine into the dis- 
orders committed by them, and punish the offenders. 

His Excellency held a Council on the 19th instant, in the presence of 
the principal inhabitants of the town, and on the following day a meeting 
was held, to which were invited the Consuls of the Foreign Powers, who 
represented to his Excellency the bad impression the conduct of these 
disorderly troops would have in the country, if they were allowed to 
commit disorders with impunity. 

Great credit is due to his Excellency for the promptitude with which 
he exerted himself to restore tranquillity, dispel the fears of the inhabit- 
ants, and restore confidence to them. 

The Albanians will be gradually removed from Syria to Malatia,—a 
measure which will impress upon the minds of the people the anxiety of 
His 'mperial Highness’s Government to remove every cause of annoyance 
to them. 

I have, & 


Bs 
(Signed) RICHARD WOOD. 


bo 
a 
bo 


340 


No. 207. 


Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, April 2, 1841. 
IN reply to your despatch of the 6th of March, inclosng a 
copy of a letter from Mr. Wood, respecting the proceedings of the 
Albanian troops in Syria, from which it appears that the Commander of 
the Ottoman forces in that country intends gradually to remove those 
troops to Malatia; I have to state to your Excellency, that it appears to 
Her Majesty’s Government to be highly desirable that these Albanian 
troops should be removed from Syria te ee ans not gradually. 
am, 


c. 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 
ne 


No. 208. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received April 2.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, March 6, 1841. 


I INCLOSE a report from Mr. Wood on the conduct of Ibrahim 
Pasha, and his refusal to deliver up the Syrian conscripts and the 
Turkish marines. > 


Inclosure in No. 208. 
Mr. Wood to Viscount Ponsonby. 


Head-Quarters, Jaffa, 
My Lord, February 14, 1841. 

I HAVE the honour to state, that from the latest news the total 
amount of Egyptian troops still at Gaza, does not exceed 4,000 in all, 
intended to be embarked the moment a sufficient number of vessels can 
be procured for that purpose. There are already thirteen ships of war 
at Gaza, and others are expected daily with a steamer for the conveyance 
of Ibrahim Pasha to Egypt. 

I had the honour to transmit to your Lordship, in my letter of the 
2nd instant, a copy of a written promise signed by the Seraskier Pasha, 
General Jochmus, and the Mustechar Effendi, pledging themselves to 
conform to the formal declaration given to the Egyptians by Captain 
Stewart, of Her Majesty’s navy, and Colonel Alderson, that no further 
hostilities should be attempted against them by the Turkish army, pro- 
vided that the total evacuation was effected within seven days from the 
day of its date, viz., the 30th of J anuary. 

Not only has this condition not been fulfilled up to the present date 
(as I anticipated it would not unless it suited the convenience of Ibrahim 
Pasha), but, moreover, he has refused to deliver up the Syrian conscripts, 
and the Turkish sailors and marines of the Turkish fleet that had been 
embodied in the Syrio-Egyptian army. Rechid Pasha wrote to me on 
the subject from Gaza, and I submitted his letter to the Council: but as 
the error had been already committed of allowing the Egyptians to 
assemble at that place with their arms, contrary to the instructions 
of the Sublime Porte, and other engagements had been entered into both 
in Syria and in Egypt, the Council evinced no disposition to protest ener- 
getically against all the acts of the enemy that were at variance, or in 
direct opposition, with the stipulations agreed to at Alexandria between 
Mazloum Bey and Mehemet Ali, on the faithful execution of which de- 


341 


pended solely the suspension of hostilities. The Syrian conscripts, there- 
fore, and the Turkish sailors and marines, have been compelled to 
accompany the troops to Egypt. . 

These embarrassing questions might have been obviated at the 
commencement, had the Council followed the suggestion of taking 
possession of the pass of Beshairi, with 1,000 or 2,000 cavalry, which 
would have obliged Ibrahim Pasha to have continued his retreat to 
Egypt through the Desert, or, if too weak to have made that attempt, to 
aaa to our conditions previous to being allowed to proceed to 

aza. 

All the deserters declare that he could not have remained in the 
desert two days more, and that the men were too disheartened and too 
weak for want of nourishment to have endeavoured to force the aforesaid 
pass. By this simple manceuvre, without the renewal of hostilities, or 
infringing in any manner the stipulations,—for the road through the 
desert would have been left open,—Ibrahim Pasha would have been 
compelled to accede to all our demands. 

The total loss of Ibrahim Pasha is reported to amount to 63,500 men, 
619 guns, and 148 field pieces: but as I am aware that very full reports 
on this subject will be transmitted to your Lordship by General Jochmus, 
I will not presume to enter on a subject on which I have not before me the 
requisite data to form an opinion. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) RICHARD WOOD. 


No. 209. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received April 2.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, March 9, 1841. 


I HAVE this day received the translation made by Mr. Frederick 
Pisani of the letter written by the Pasha of Egypt to the Grand Vizier on 
the subject of the firman conferring the hereditary Government of Egypt 
upon the family of Mehemet Ali, and of the conditions annexed by the 
Sultan to that grant; and I have the honour to inclose copy thereof. 


Inclosure in No. 209. 


Mehemet Ali to the Grand Vizier —(Communicated to Viscount Ponsonby, 
March 7, 1841.) 


(Traduction.) 

J’ Al eu Vhonneur de recevoir la lettre de Votre Altesse, par laquelle 
jai appris que mon empressement a prouver par des faits mon dévoue- 
ment et ma soumission a4 celui qui est l’ombre de Dieu sur la terre, lui 
ayant été fort agréable, il a daigné me réintegrer dans le Gouvernement 
de Egypte avec hérédité, et que le firman Impérial qui renferme quelques 
conditions attachées a cette hérédité, et qui est orné en haut d’un rescrit 
Impérial, m’était envoyé par son Excellence Said Muhib Effendi, un 
des Principaux Employés de la Sublime Porte, et Ministre de la Justice. 
Conformément 21 mon devoir de sujet dévoué, jai ordonné la formation 
d’un cortége d’honneur, que j’ai envoyé a la rencontre de son Excellence ; 
j’ai fait tirer de nombreux coups de canon des batteries de terre et des 
batimens, et pavoiser les vaisseaux; réjouissances qui ont rempli de con- 
tentement et de joie le ceur des sujets de la Sublime Porte, qui ont 
adressé des priéres au Trés Haut pour la conservation des jours et la 
prospérité de Sa Majesté Impériale. Veuille le Supréme Ordonnateur 
de Vunivers faire en sorte que notre trés Auguste, trés Grand, et trés 
Puissant Padichah et Maitre répande a jamais ses faveurs sur les hommes, 
et brille dans le royaume de la justice et de l’équité. 


342 


Tl est clair et évident que quelques efforts que nous fassions, mes 
fils, mes arriére-neveux, et moi, jusqu’a notre extinction, pour remplir 
les devoirs de notre dévouement, nous ne pourrons jamais témoigner 
comme il faut notre reconnaissance pour ces faveurs insignes. Cependant 
jai la confiance que Sa Hautesse, qui est pleine de générosité et de 
clémence, mue par son’ caractére magnanime, ne crolra pas qu il soit 
digne d’elle, que lorsque le Créateur du monde dispense les hommes de 
conditions dures, les Padichahs qui sont doués des qualités divines, 
attachent & leurs bienfaits et 4 leurs faveurs des conditions inexécutables. 
Je prends donc la liberté d’exposer ici mes motifs pour ne pas accepter 
certaines conditions. ek ai 

Et en premier lieu, pour ce qui regarde Vhérédité, il est dit qu'elle 
appartiendra 4 ma postérité male, et que le Gouvernement de VEgypte 
sera conféré 4 Pindividu qui aura été préféré par le Sultan. Moi aussi 
j’ai la conviction qu’en effet ce qwil y a de mieux, c'est que Phéredité 
appartienne Ala ligne masculine. Mais c’est au tems et a l’expérience 
seuls 4 faire voir lequel des enfans est le meilleur et le plus digne sujet; 
et ce point, c’est la famille qui se trouvera ici et les principaux employés 
de la famille qui le sauront. I] est done clair que s’il est établi comme 
condition, que ’hérédité passera de V’ainé a l’ainé, dans la ligne masculine, 
la famille existante et ses principaux employés feront la demande que 
Vainé soit nommé, et Sa Hautesse daignera accueillir leur- demande, et 
de cette maniére le bon ordre et la tranquillité seront maintenus. TI] est 
évident, d’ailleurs, que mue par des sentimens de clémence, Sa Hautesse 
veut le maintien du repos et de la tranquillité, et c’est pour cela que je 
prie que la question de Vhérédité soit arrangée comme il a été dit plus 
haut. 

Vient ensuite Pexécution compléte en Egypte des dispositions du 
Hatti Schérif de Gulhané, des lois de la Sublime Porte établies et a 
établir, et de tous les traités faits ou a faire avec les Puissances amies. 

Tous les principes consacrés par le Hatti Schérif susdit, ainsi que la 
plus grande partie des conséquences qui en découlent, sont depuis plus de 
vingt ans mis en pratique ici. Seulement quelques unes de ces consé- 
quences n’étant pas en harmonie avec les dispositions des pays et la 
nature des choses, sont nécessairement restées sans effet. Malgré cela, 
cependant, il ne se fait rien, grace a Dieu, sous les auspices de Sa Hau- 
tesse, qui ne soit conforme a l’équité et a la modération. 

Venons maintenant a mes procédés envers les Puissances amies. Ces 
procédés ont, de tout tems, été basés sur leurs traités avec la Sublime 
Porte. Je n’ai pas moi, et je n’aurai pas, en mon particulier, des traités 
avec elles. En ma qualité de sujet, et de sujet soumis, il est de mon 
devoir de conformer ma conduite aux traités existans entre la Sublime 
Porte et ces Puissances. 

Quant aux lois faites ou a étre faites par la Sublime Porte pour 
Yadministration intérieure des Etats de Sa Hautesse, je dirai relativement 
aux lois militaires et aux lois administratives ce qui suit. Votre Altesse 
sait que le systéme des troupes réglées a été introduit en Egypte il y a 
vingt ans. Or, 4 l’époque de l’introduction de ce systéme, j’ai fait traduire. 
le code militaire Francais, je l'ai fait rédiger par les Oulémas, adapter a 
la portée des indigénes, et a la nature de leurs dispositions, et concilier 
avec les prescriptions des lois saintes; et cela est devenu un livre légal 
entre les mains du public,—livre, dont les dispositions ont été a la longue 
adoptées peu a peu par tous; de maniére qu’aujourd’hui tout le monde 
s’y conforme et s’y soumet. Votre Altesse voit done sans doute quwil y 
a de nombreux inconvéniens 4 abolir des lois solidement établies, pour 
leur substituer de nouvelles. Je prie, par conséquent, qu’on laisse exister 
ce code tel qu’il est. 

Les affaires de chaque pays dépendent de la nature de sa position. 
De 1a la nécessité naturelle d’établir des principes administratifs dans un 
pays suivant la nature des affaires qui lui sont propres; et il est clair 
qu’on ne peut appliquer ace pays-ci des lois faites pour un autre pays. 
M! a la une régle naturelle, qui est observée méme dans les Etats de 

Hurope, ou chaque partie d’un royaume a des lois analogues aux 
dispositions des habitans. Je prie donc que, prenant en considération ce 


343 


que les régles d’une bonne administration et de la prudence exigent, on 
renonce a l’abrogation des réglemens existans. 

Un autre point: savoir, la perception des dimes, des autres droits, et 
des impéts, de la méme maniére qu’elle aura lieu dans les autres parties 
de lEmpire, et le recouvrement avant tout, et sans défalquer aucune 
depense, pour le compte de la Sublime Porte, de la quatriéme partie du 
montant annuel des droits de douane, des dimes, des impots, et de tous 
les revenus de Egypte. Quant au mode de perception, je dis; on 
n’ignore pas que les impots arbitraires et les droits fixés sont dans chaque 
pays deux choses distinctes ; et que cette distinction provient de ce qu’il 
faut établir les impéts suivant l’état de la population et la position des 
pays, et d’aprés l'état des affaires et des opérations des individus. C’est 
pour cela que tout systéme suivi dans les parties de I’Empire situées en 

Asie et en Europe ne saurait étre mis en vigueur dans les parties de 
lEmpire situées en Afrique; aussi je prie d’étre dispensé de cela aussi. 

La condition de mettre 4 part la quatriéme partie des revenus pour 
la Sublime Porte, avant que d’en avoir défalqué aucune dépense, est une 
condition a laquelle il est impossible de satisfaire ; et la preuve en est que 
méme les Grandes Puissances ne retirent pas, je ne dis pas un quart des 
revenus, mais méme beaucoup moins que cela de nombreuses parties de 
leurs royaumes, qu’elles ont mises dans l’état le plus florissant possible, 
et dont les populations se trouvent dans une situation aisée et tranquille. 
J’ai recours a cet égard, comme en toute autre circonstance, a Péquité et 
a la faveur Souveraine de Sa Majesté Impériale, notre Seigneur et Maitre, 
dont Vesprit est éclairé par des inspirations divines, et je la supplie de 
daigner user de clémence envers ces populations qui ont, pendant nombre 
d’années, tant souffert des événemens amenés par la force des choses, et 
qui méritent de jouir, sous les auspices de Sa Hautesse, de repos et de 
tranquillité. Je supplie donc Sa Hautesse, que par un effet de sa bonté 
Souveraine,, elle veuille protéger les habitans de ces contrées en les 
dispensant d’une condition extrémement onéreuse qui redoublerait leurs 

ouffrances. | 

Fort de ma sincérité et de mon dévouement, je pense qu’eu égard aux 
circonstances actuelles, on voudra bien me faire grace de droits 4 payer, et 
cela pour deux ou trois ans. En employant alors tous mes efforts pour 
faire fleurir cette belle possession de Sa Majesté Impériale, je tacherai 
d’assurer le repos et la tranquillité des habitans, et de leur faire bénir le 
nom de Sa Hautesse le Sultan, notre Seigneur et Maitre, et de rendre un 
service essentiel en faisant prospérer et fleurir une partie de ses Etats. 
Mais 4 quoi bon? La divergence d’opinions complique l'affaire. Quoi- 
qu'il en soit, comptant sur ma grande franchise et sur mon parfait dévoue- 
ment, je ne désespére point de voir enfin les opinions réunis 4 mon égard. 
En attendant, des conditions dont il s’agit, j’ai accepté les suivantes : 

En tems de paix le nombre de troupes Egyptiennes n’excédera pas 
celui de 18,000 hommes. 

Aucun nouveau batiment de guerre ne sera construit sans l’autorisa- 
tion de Sa Hautesse. 

La monnaie Impériale qui sera frappée en Egypte, sera pareille, sous 
les rapports du poid, de Valoi et des formes, a la monnaie Impériale qui 
sera frappée 4 Constantinople. ade 

Il sera défendu de faire des incursions comme cela se pratiquait 
autrefois de tems 4 autre, dans les villages de la Nigritie, dans lesquelles 

on enlevait des hommes et des femmes, et des jeunes gens dont on faisait 
des Eunuques, état quiest un obstacle a la procréation. sear’ 

Les troupes de terre et de mer, soldats et officiers, seront habillés 
comme les troupes Impériales ; leurs drapeaux seront tout a fait les 
mémes. 

Ces conditions seront exécutées conformément a la volonté Souveraine. 

Il y a seulement ceci a dire quant a l’habillement : c’est que les habi- 

tans de ces pays-ci n’y sont pas accoutumés, et quon ne saurait faire un 
changement tout A coup. Il faut s’y prendre tout doucement, et les y 
accoutumer peu a peu. Mais, s’il plait 4 Dieu, la volonté de Sa Hautesse 
sera faite a cet égard aussi. _ fs ‘ jae age 
En acceptant sans hésitation les conditions ci-dessus énumérces, J'ai 


344 


donné une preuve suffisante de ma franchise et de la loyaute de mon 
dévouement. Ainsi, lorsque Votre Altesse aura pris connaissance de mes 
excuses pour ne pas accepter les autres conditions, —excuses que j’ai déve- 
loppées plus haut,—ce sera un acte de clémence digne de Sa Majesté 
Impériale que de me dispenser de ces conditions, ou de les modifier. 


(Translation.) 


I HAVE had the honour to receive your Highness’s letter, by which 
I have learnt that my alacrity in proving by facts my devotion and my 
submission to him who is the shadow of God on earth, having been very 
agreeable to him, he has deigned to reinstate me in the Government of 
Egypt with hereditary succession, and that the Imperial Firman which 

‘contains some conditions attached to that hereditary succession, and 

which is decorated at the top with an Imperial Ordinance, was sent to 
me by his Excellency Said Muhib Effendi, one of the principal servants 
of the Sublime Porte, and Minister of Justice. In conformity with my 
duty as a devoted subject, I ordered a procession of honour to be formed, 
which I sent to meet his Excellency; I caused numerous salutes to be 
fired by the land batteries and by the ships, and the vessels to be dressed 
in colours: rejoicings which filled with joy and with contentment the 
hearts of the subjects of the Sublime Porte, who addressed prayers to 
the Most High for the preservation of the days and for the prosperity of 
His Imperial Majesty. May the Supreme Ruler of the Universe be 
pleased to ordain that our most august, most mighty, and most powerful 
Padishah and Master shall for ever spread abroad his favours over man- 
kind, and shine in the kingdom of justice and of equity. 

It is clear and evident that whatsoever efforts my children, my 
posterity and myself, even to the time of our death, may make to 
fulfil the duties of our devotion, we shall never be able to evince as we 
ought our gratitude for these distinguished favours. Nevertheless, | am 
confident that His Highness, who is full of generosity and of clemency, 
moved by his magnanimous character, will not consider it worthy of 
himself that, while the Creator of the World exempts mankind from harsh 
conditions, the Padishahs who are endowed with divine qualities, should 
attach to their benefits and to their favours, conditions which cannot be 
executed. I therefore take the liberty to set forth here my reasons for 
not accepting certain conditions. ; ‘ | 

And in the first place, as respects the hereditary succession, it is said 
that it shall belong to my male posterity, and that the government of 
Egypt shall be conferred upon the individual who shall have been: pre- 
ferred by the Sultan. I also am convinced that in fact it is better that 
the hereditary succession should appertain to the male line. But time and 
experience alone can show which of the children is the best and most wor- 
thy subject ; and the family here, and the principal servants of the family, 
will know this point. It is clear then that if it is laid down as a condition 
that the hereditary succession shall pass from the elder to the elder, in the 
male line, the existing family and its principal servants will demand that 
the eldest should be appointed, and His Highness will deign to agree to 
their demand, and in this manner good order and tranquillity will be 
maintained. It is evident, moreover, that His Highness moved by senti- 
ments of clemency, desires the maintenance of repose and of tranquillity, 
and it is for that reason that I request that the question of the hereditary 
succession may be settled as has been stated above. 

Next comes the complete execution in Egypt of the dispositions of 
the Hatti-Sheriff of Gulhané, of the laws of the Sublime Porte estab- 
lished, or to be established, and of all the Treaties made or to be made 
with friendly Powers. 

All the principles established by the above-mentioned Hatti-Sheriff, 
as well as the greater part of the consequences which result from it, are 
for many years put in practice here, only some of these consequences not 
being in unison with the disposition of the countries and the nature of 


345, 


things, have necessarily remained inoperative. Still, nevertheless, nothing, 
thank God, is done under the auspices of His Highness which is not in 
conformity with equity and moderation. 

_ Let us pass now to my proceedings with respect to the friendly 
Powers. These proceedings have, from all times, been based on their 
treaties with the Sublime Porte. I have not, and I shall not have, in my 
individual capacity, treaties with them. In my character of subject, and 
of submissive subject, it is my duty to conform my conduct to the treaties 
existing between the Sublime Porte and other Powers. 

As regards the laws made or to be made by the Sublime Porte for the 
internal administration of His Highness’ dominions, I will state as follows 
respecting the military laws and those of civil administration. Your 
Highness is aware that the system of regular troops was introduced into 
Egypt twenty years ago. Now at the time when that system was intro- 
duced, I caused the French military code to be translated, I had it drawn 
up by the Ulemas, adapted to the capacity of the natives, and to the 
nature of their dispositions, and made conformable to the injunctions of 
the holy laws; and this has become a lawful book in the hands of 
the public, a book, of which the arrangements have in the long run 
been adopted gradually by all; so that at the present time every one 
conforms himself to and submits toit. Your Excellency doubtless therefore 
‘sees that there are numerous inconveniences in abrogating laws solidly 
fixed, in order to set up new ones in their place. I accordingly request 
that this code may be suffered to remain as it is. 

The affairs of each country depend on the nature of its position. 
Hence the natural necessity of laying down the principles of administra- 
tion in a country, according to the nature of the affairs which are peculiar 
to it; and it is evident that laws made for another country cannot be 
applied to this country. That is a natural rule which is observed even 
in the States of Europe, where each part of a kingdom has laws analo- 
gous to the dispositions of the inhabitants, I request therefore, that in 
consideration of what is required by the rules of good administration and 
of prudence, the abrogation of the existing regulations may be waved. 

Another point: namely, the levying of the tenths, of the other duties, 
and taxes, in the same manner as shall be the case in the other parts 
-of the Empire, and the collection, in the first instance, and without 
abatement for charges, on account of the Sublime Porte, of the fourth 
part of the annual amount of the custom-duties, tenths, taxes, and all the 
revenues of Egypt. With regard to the mode of levying, I say, it is no- 
torious that arbitrary imposts and fixed duties are in every country two 
distinct things, and that this distinction arises from its being necessary to 
settle the imposts according to the state of the population, and the posi- 
tion of the countries, and according to the state of affairs and the opera- 
tions of individuals. It is for this reason that the whole system observed 
in the parts of the Empire situated in Asia and in Europe, could not be 
enforced in the parts of the Empire situated in Africa, wherefore I pray 
to be exempted from this also. 

The condition of setting apart for the Sublime Porte the fourth part 
of the revenues, previously to deducting from them any expenditure, is one 
which it is impossible to comply with, and this is proved by the fact that, 
even the Great Powers do not derive, I do not say a fourth part of the re- 
venues, but even much less than that, from numerous parts of their 
kingdoms which they have placed in the most flourishing condition pos- 
sible, and the population of which are in easy and tranquil circumstances. 
In this respect, as under all circumstances I have recourse to the equity 
and sovereign power of His Imperial Majesty, our Lord and Master, 
whose mind is illuminated by divine inspiration, and I supplicate him 
to be pleased to show clemency towards these people who for a number 
of years have suffered so much from events brought on by the force of 
circumstances, and who deserve to enjoy repose and tranquillity under the 
auspices of His Highness. I beseech therefore His Highness, that agree- 
ably to his sovereign goodness, he will be pleased to protect the inhabit- 
ants of these countries, by relieving them from an extremely burthensome 
condition which would increase their aeripet 

2 


346 


In consideration of my sincerity and of my devotion, I think that. 
under existing circumstances, | ought to be excused from payments for 
two or three years. Employing in that case all my efforts to cause the 
prosperity of this fair possession of His Imperial Majesty, I will endea- 
vour to ensure the repose and tranquillity of the inhabitants, and to cause 
them to bless the name of His Highness the Sultan our Lord and Master, 
and to render essential service by making a portion of his dominions 
prosperous and flourishing. But to what purpose? The difference of 
opinion complicates the business. Be that as it may, reckoning on my 
great frankness, and on my perfect devotion, | donot despair of seeing, at 
length, opinions agreed with respect to myself. Meanwhile, of the con- 
ditions in question I have accepted the following. 

In time of peace, the number of Egyptian troops shall not exceed 
18,000 men. | 

No. new vessel of war shall be built without the permission of His— 
Highness. 

The Imperial money which shall be coined in Egypt, shall resemble, 
in respect to weight, alloy, and shape, the Imperial money which shall be 
coined at Constantinople. 7 

It shall be forbidden to make inroads, as was heretofore occasionally 
the case, into the villages of Nigritia, in which men and women were car- 
‘ ried off, and young persons, who were made eunuchs,—a state which is an 
impediment to procreation. , 

The land and sea forces, soldiers and officers, shall be dressed as the 
Imperial troops; their flags shall be altogether the same. 

These conditions will be executed in conformity with the Sovereign 
will. 

There is only this to be said with regard to the clothing; that the 
inhabitants of these countries are not accustomed to it, and that it would 
be impossible to effect a change all at once. It is necessary to proceed 
gently, and to accustom them to it by degrees. But, please God, the will 
' of His Highness shall be done in this respect also. 

In accepting without hesitation the conditions above enumerated, I 
have given a sufficient proof of my frankness and of the sincerity of my 
devotion. Wherefore, when your Highness shall have made yourself ac- 
quainted with my excuses for not accepting the other conditions, excuses 
which I have explained above, it will be an act of clemency worthy of 
His Imperial Majesty, to relieve me of those conditions or to modify them. 


No. 210. 


Viscount Palmerston to Lord Beauvale. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, April 2, 1841. 

HER Majesty’s Government have this morning received from Lord 
Ponsonby the despatch of which I inclose a copy, transmitting a trans- 
lation of the letter addressed by Mehemet Ali to the Grand Vizier, in 
reply to the firmans sent to Mehemet Ali announcing his restoration to 
the Pashalic of Egypt, with the additional privilege of hereditary suc- 
cession for his descendants, and stating the conditions attached by the 
Sultan to those grants. 

_Her Majesty’s Government regret to find the letter of Mehemet Ali 
so little in accordance with that unconditional submission which he had 
in the first instance announced ; for, in fact, that letter, (if the true 
meaning of it is extracted from the involved and ambiguous phraseology 
in which it is wrapped up,) announces Mehemet Ali’s refusal. to accept 
the greater part of the conditions, including several of those which the 
Four Powers have considered indispensable. 

_ Kor, first, with regard to the manner in which the hereditary succes- 
sion is to be granted to his descendants, Mehemet Ali implies that it is 
to be the Pasha for the time being, who is to choose his own SUCCESSOF ; 
a principle directly’ at variance with that laid down in the Collective 
Note of the 30th of January, and in the Note of the 13th of March. 


347 


ft has always been the clear intention of the Four Powers, in advi-' 
sing the Sultan to grant hereditary succession to Mehemet’s family, that 
this succession should in each case be an exercise of the Sovereign right 
of the Sultan; and the condition specially insisted upon by the Austrian 
Government, that no descendant of Mehemet Ali should become legally 
Pasha of Egypt, till he had received his investiture at Constantinople 
from the hands of the Sultan, was evidently intended to maintain that 
principle; and to reserve to the Sultan the power of rejecting any unfit 
person, by withholding from him the requisite investiture. 

Therefore this demand of Mehemet Ali, that the members of his 
family, and the chief officers employed in Egypt, shall, on each vacancy, 
choose that one of his descendants whom they may think the best and 
most worthy, will probably have been rejected by the Porte as incon- 
sistent with the advice and opinion of the Four Powers. 

{t is to be hoped, however, that the Sultan will have given a fair and 
reasonable explanation of that part of his firman which relates to this 
point, and will have declared that it is his intention, on every vacancy, 
to choose that one of Mehemet Ali’s descendants, who, according to the 
Kuropean principle of primogeniture, would be the next in order of 
succession, unless such candidate should be disqualified by nonage or by 
physical disability, and that in such case the next in order should be | 
appointed instead of him. 

It is for the interest of all parties that such an arrangement should 
be made, because, unless a deciding power be reserved to the Sultan, civil 
contests and struggles of conflicting claimants for the Pashalic, are 
certain to arise; and such disputes would, in the first place, disturb the 
tranquillity of Egypt; and, in the next place, lead to the interference of 
the Sultan by force of arms, and probably to the removal of Mehemet 
‘Ali’s family altogether. 

Mehemet Ali then goes on to say, that he declines carrying into 
execution in Egypt the Hatti-Sheriff of Gulhané; but it is to be remem- 
bered that this Hatti-Sheriff has already been proclaimed in Egypt by an 
officer sent thither for that purpose by the Porte; and as this Hatti- 
Sheriff forms part of the laws of the Empire, its strict execution in 
Egypt is declared by the Collective Note of the 30th of January, 1841, to 
be considered by the Four Powers as “ indispensable.” 

The next passage in Mehemet’s letter relates to the Treaties con- 
cluded by the Sultan with Foreign Powers; and this passage, though 
ambiguously worded, would seem to imply that Mehemet Ali acquiesces 
in the application of all those Treaties to Egypt; if it were not that in 
the concluding part of his letter, where he sums up the conditions which 
he means to accept, he makes no mention of this one. But, nevertheless, 
this condition has been declared by the Note of the 30th of January, to 
be “ indispensable.” 

The letter then goes on to mention the general laws of the Turkish 
Empire, and divides them into two classes,—the first Military, the second 
Administrative. 

With regard to the first class, Mehemet Ali says, that for some years 
past, a Military Code has been in force in Egypt, which is founded upon 
the Military Code of France, and that he wishes that this Code should 
continue in force. It must be owned that this request seems reasonable, | 
and in all probability the Porte could not do better than to adopt and 
apply to the rest of the Sultan’s army, the Military Code which has been 
established by Mehemet Ali for the troops in Egypt. 

But Mehemet Ali also requests, that all his administrative laws may 
also remain in force; and this request is incompatible with the applica- 
‘tion of the whole of the Turkish laws to Egypt; and, moreover, the pro- 
bability is, that the real object of this request is, that Mehemet Ali may 
thereby be enabled to maintain those abuses, and to continue those 
arbitrary and vexatious proceedings, by which he has inflicted so much 
poverty and misery upon the people of Egypt, and has succeeded in 
applying all the wealth and resources of the country to the prosecution 
of his military schemes. 

It is likely that the Sultan will ee to comply with this request as 

2 


348 


entirely incompatible with the unanimous opinion and.advice of the Four 
Powers. 4. 

It is scarcely necessary to remark upon. the fallacy of the argument in 
regard to this point, which Mehemet Ali founds upon the fact that many 
countries, which now are provinces of some powerful State, had laws and 
institutions of their own, before they were by conquest, or In consequence 
of marriages, or by other means, incorporated in the States to which they 
now belong, and have since their incorporation retained their ancient 
laws and institutions: for there can be no real analogy between the 
ancient laws of such provinces, and the arbitrary regulations which 
Mehemet Ali has established in Egypt during the last twenty years, 
without any rightful authority to do so. . 

With regard to imposts and taxes, Mehemet Ali declines to confine 
himself to collecting such as are legal, and are established by the laws of 
the Empire, and he demands that he may continue to be allowed to collect 
extraordinary and arbitrary taxes from the people of Egypt. This 
demand, of course, the Sultan will at once and peremptorily reject; for 
there can be no just reason why the same system of taxation should not 
be applied to the African, as to the Asiatic and European provinces of the 
Turkish Empire; and the Collective Note and the Treaty of July declare, 
that no taxes shall be levied in Egypt but those which are legally esta- 
blished ; that is to say, established by the laws of the Empire. 

With regard to the amount of the tribute to be paid to the Porte, 
Mehemet Ali states, that it is impossible for him to pay as much as one- 
fourth of the gross revenue of Egypt; and he urges as an argument in 
proof of that statement, that even powerful Governments do not draw 
from many portions of their territories so much as a fourth part of the 
gross revenue. 

But this assertion is not borne out by any fact, because most 
Governments do draw from each of their provinces the whole of the 
revenue collected in that province: and they then pay out of the general 
treasury the charge of the civil and military establishments of the whole 
State; and it.is not easy to say what portion of those aggregate expenses 
belong to each separate province. 

One-fourth of the gross revenue of Egypt may or may not be more 
than Mehemet Ali ought to pay as tribute to the Sultan. If, indeed, the 
calculation made by M. Laurin is at all near the truth, that amount 
would not be too much; because M. Laurin estimates the gross revenue 
of Egypt, after all the laws and treaties of the Empire shall have been 
carried into execution in Egypt, at 400,000 purses; and he estimates the 
expense of the civil, military, and naval establishments, at 100,000 
purses ; so that if Mehemet Ali were to pay another 100,000 purses as 
tribute, he would still retain for his own personal expenses 200,000 
purses, or a sum double the whole amount of the charge of all his esta- 
blishments. Now even if the charge of the establishments of Egypt were 
twice as great as M. Laurin estimates them to be, still this arrangement 
would leave Mehemet Ali 100,000 purses, or half a million sterling for his 
own personal expenses ; and surely such an arrangement cannot be consi- 
dered as hard or unjust towards him. 

But the ground upon which Mehemet Ali asks for a reduction of the 
amount of tribute, is not admissible. He founds his request upon an 
appeal, on behalf of the people of Egypt, to the Sultan’s generosity, as if 
the amount of the payments to be made by that people were to depend, in 
any degree, upon the amount of Mehemet Ali’s tribute. This is a palpa- 
ble fallacy. The amount to be paid by the people of Egypt will be 
regulated by the laws which determine the taxes of the Empire; and 
those taxes will not vary, nor will their produce in Egypt be greater or 
smaller, whether the Sultan receives a fourth or only a smaller proportion 
of the whole amount, which the people of Egypt shall according to the 
law have paid. 

Even if the Sultan shall, upon any other grounds, alter his arrange- 
ment about the tribute, it is manifest that he cannot be expected to do so 
in compliance with the particular reasons stated by Mehemet Ali. 

But not content with asking for a diminution of tribute, Mehemet 


349° 


Ali announces his intention of not paying any tribute at all. For not- 
withstanding the Article in the Treaty which states, that he is not to 
make any deduction from the arrears of his tribute, on account of the 
expenses which he has incurred in maintaining the officers and crews of 
the Turkish fleet, while in the harbour of Alexandria (a stipulation put 
into the ‘Treaty, expressly at the suggestion of the Austrian Plenipoten- 
tiary), Mehemet Ali not only omits all mention of paying any arrears of 
tribute at all, but proposes to defer paying any prospective tribute for 
two or three years to come, which clearly means that he does not intend 
to pay any tribute at all. 

After stating what conditions he declines, he proceeds to specify 
those which he accepts, and they are the following :— 

First. ‘That in time of peace (by which, it is probable, he means, 
when he shall be at peace with the Sultan), the troops to be kept up in 
Egypt shall not exceed 18,000 men. This, as far as it goes, is satis- 
factory; for, although he will probably not observe the restriction, 
yet Re violation of it would set the Sultan free with regard to his 

asha. 

Secondly. That no new ships of war should be built in Egypt, without 
the previous consent of the Sultan. This is also a condition which will 
become in the future important, although it is probable that Mehemet 
Ali has at present as many ships as he can be able to man. 

Thirdly. That the coin in Egypt shall be the same as that in Con- 
stantinople. It is believed, that the Turkish coin at present is more 
debased than the Egyptian, and that Mehemet Ali would be no loser by 
calling in the coin of Egypt, and reissuing the same nominal amount in 
- Turkish currency. | 

Fourthly. Mehemet engages to give up his African slave hunts. If 
this engagement shall be faithfully performed, it will certainly be a great 
advantage gained for the interests of humanity. 

Fifthly. That the uniforms and flags, military and naval, in Egypt, 
shall be assimilated to those of the rest of the Empire; with the reserva- 
tion, however, that the change of uniform shall be introduced gradually, 
which of course means not at all. 

But this reservation might well be agreed to by the Sultan; for if 
Her Majesty’s Government have been rightly informed, the Sultan would 
do more wisely by giving to the rest of his army and navy the dress of 
the army and navy of Egypt, than by giving to the army and navy of 
Egypt the dress of the rest of his naval and military forces. 

I have already observed, that in this enumeration of the conditions 
which he professes to accept, Mehemet Ali omits all mention of the con- 
dition that the Treaties concluded by the Sultan shall be carried into 
effect in Egypt. 

The Austrian Government will see from the foregoing summary of 
Mehemet Ali’s letter to the Grand Vizier, that Mehemet Ali declines 
accepting several of the most important of those stipulations which the 
Four Powers have either advised the Sultan to impose, or have declared 
to be in their opinion indispensable. 

Upon the receipt of that letter this morning, I requested the Repre- 
sentatives of Austria, Prussia, and Russia, to come to me this afternoon, 
that we might read the letter and consider its contents, and accordingly 
those Plenipotentiaries came to me at four o’clock. 

We all agreed, however, that, in the present state of the matter, 
there is nothing that could be necessary for us todo. We all felt that 
the Porte will probably have answered the letter of Mehemet Ali in con- 
formity with the tenor of our Collective Note of the 30th of January to 
Chekib Effendi; and that, at all events, no step on our part would be 
expedient unless some commmunication on this subject should be made to 
us by the Porte. 

Iam, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


a 


350 


No. 211. 


Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, April 2, 1841. 

YOUR despatch of the 9th instant, transmitting a translation of 
Mehemet Ali’s letter to the Grand Vizier in reply to the firmans of the 
13th of February, has been this morning received at this Office. Her | 
Majesty’s Government regret that the Pasha’s letter is so unsatisfactory, 
and so little in accordance with his previous professions of unconditional 
submission. In the present state of this matter I have no further 
instructions to give your Excellency, because it remains to be seen 
whether the Porte will have answered that letter at once or will have 
referred to the Conference at London for advice as to the answer to be 
given. If the Porte shall have applied to the Representatives of the 
Four Powers at Constantinople for counsel, those Representatives will 
have found in the Collective Note of the 30th of January a sufficient 
guide to direct them in advising the Porte; and they will afterwards 
have found laid down in the Note of the 13th of March the same princi-— 
ples which are stated in the Collective Note of the 30th of January. 

I transmit to your Excellency a copy of a despatch which I have. 
addressed to Her Majesty’s Ambassador at Vienna, containing some 
Seivibanyeen which have suggested themselves upon Mehemet Ali’s 
etter. ; 
The Conference assembled to-day to take cognizance of the Pasha’s 
letter, but we all agreed that no further step on our part is at present 
necessary or expedient on this matter. 

Tam, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. | 


No. 212. 


The Marquess of Clanricarde to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received April 5.) 


(Extract.) St. Petersburgh, March 23, 1841. 


I HAVE received by post your Lordship’s despatch of the 8th instant, 
containing the Protocol signed at London on the Sth instant. 

Count Nesselrode has been kind enough to inform me of further pro- 
ceedings of the Conference that have been reported to him, and of the 
latest intelligence from Constantinople; viz., the firmans sent by the 
Divan to Alexandria, and the notes by which these documents were com- 
municated to the Envoys of the Allied Powers, and to the Representatives 
of the other Governments at Constantinople ; and the reply addressed by 
Lord Ponsonby to the Porte. 

_ Count Nesselrode tells me that he has given no new instructions to M. 
Titow, but that he has repeated those he originally gave; namely, to be 
guided by the Treaty of July, and the proceedings of the Conference in Lon- 
don. His Excellency says, Baron Brunnow, who is in the entire confidence 
of the Emperor, was sent to that Conference expressly to avoid the confusion 


that might arise by giving instructions to two different Ministers acting 
apart, and under different circumstances. 


No. 213. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston —(Received April 7.) 


My Lord, | Therapia, March 17, 1841. 

M. TITOW has communicated to me instructions he received from 
Count Nesselrode on the subject of Syria, and which have been made 
known to your Lordship, and approved of by you. M. Titow is anxious 


351 


to engage the Ottoman Government to take immediate measures to give 
‘satisfaction to the Syrians, but agrees with me in the propriety of our 
having correct information respecting the old and present’ state of thing's 
in Syria, and he is therefore content that any arrangements to be now 
made by the Sublime Porte, shall be only temporary and subject to 
revision. M. Titow also agrees with me that it is particularly necessary 
the Porte should faithfully perform the promises Rechid Pasha authorized 
Mr. Wood to make to the Syrians; and he therefore thinks it right that 
Mr. Wood should be called. here to give information on that point, as wel 

as to describe the wishes, wants, and rights of the Syrians, and afford all 
the notices he can of the best means for combining the measures useful 
and desirable to the people, with the security of the rights and power of 
the Ottoman Government. 

I have written to Mr. Wood with the consent of Rechid Pasha, and 
directed him to come to Constantinople. 
; I have, &c., 

(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No. 214. 


Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, April 8, 1841. 
IN reply to your despatch, of the 17th of March, I have to 
acquaint your Excellency that I approve of your having directed Mr. 
Wood to return to Constantinople, in order to furnish such information 
as he may have acquired in Syria, as to the best means of placing the 
relations between the Syrians and the Porte on a satisfactory footing. 


I am, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 215. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received April 7.) 


My Lord, Therapia, March 17, 1841. 


YESTERDAY I had the honour of conferring with my Colleagues of 
Austria, Prussia, and Russia, upon the subject of the conduct to be 
- pursued in consequence of the late proceedings of Mehemet Ali. 

We had under our cognizance the Official Note from the Sublime 
Porte, of which I inclose a copy. The subject was long debated and care- 
fully examined by us, and it was determined that each of us should reply 
to the above-mentioned Official Note in the manner he considered most 
_a@ propos. The Internuncio seemed to think that he ought to advise the 
Sublime Porte to make a change in the mode fixed by the Sultan’s firman 
for the regulation of the succession of the family of Mehemet Ali to the 
hereditary Government of Egypt. It was objected, that by so doing, 
the Sublime Porte would enter into negotiation with Mehemet Ali; that 
the submission of Mehemet Ali is the basis upon which all has been 
rested; that it is difficult, if not impossible, to consider his last act other- 
- wise than as a denial of submission; that to negotiate with him is to dis- 
regard the basis of all our acts, as it has been prescribed by our Courts; 
and that the alteration proposed to be made by the Internuncio would be 
negotiation, and negotiation would pro tanto defeat the assertion of Sove- 
- reignty made by the firman, and be also in opposition to the declaration 
made by the Conference at London, in its Note addressed to Chekib Effendi, 
dated 30th of January. I cannot tell your Lordship what the Internuncio 
determined to do. 

The Count Kénigsmarck did not state what course he should recom- 
mend to the Sublime Porte to follow. 


352 


M. Titow said, he should answer, that he would report to his Govern- 
ment the state of affairs, and wait for instructions. 

T said I should advise the Porte to remain passive, and to ask its 
Allies for advice. 

I have to state to your Lordship that the Internuncio acquainted us 
with the information he had just received from Vienna of the probability 
that the Conference at London was dissolved, and that, if not already 
separated, it would certainly be so immediately. ‘This intelligence neces- 
sarily influenced our conduct, because it would have been useless for the 
Porte to apply to the Conference after its extinction, and wrong on our 
part to advise it. 

There was question as to the continued stay of the Ottoman Envoy 
at Alexandria if the Porte should decide for applying to its Alles for 
advice before it took any steps. M. Titow thought that. to. recall him 
might have the appearance of a manifestation of hostility. I concurred 
with him, and I suggested that means might be taken to put the Envoy 
privately in mind that his instructions directed him to leave Alexandria 
after the lapse of a specified period of time, and that he would do well to 
observe these. This, I think, cannot bean act subject to the interpretation 
that might be given to an order to him to leave Alexandria, issued pro re 
nata. . 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure in No. 215. 
Official Note from Rechid Pasha to Viscount Ponsonby. 


G 21 Moharrem, 1257 
(Traduction.) 15 Mars, lo4l. 


COPIE de la dépéche recue par la Sublime Porte de la part de Son 
Altesse Méhémet Ali Pacha, et copie de la dépéche détaillée qu’elle a 
recue de la part de son Excellence Said Muhib Effendi, ont été communi- 
quées a votre Excellence, par lesquelles elle a vu que Méhémet Ali Pacha 
a rejeté quelques unes des conditions qui lui avaient été faites et qui 
sont connues. L’hésitation de Méhémet Ali Pacha a accepter ces condi- 
tions modérées n’est guéres compatible avec la qualité de sujet, et il 
n’est pas moins clair, qu’accorder ces demandes telles qu’il les fait, c’est 
une chose aussi nuisible que contraire aux droits de Souveraineté de Sa 
Hautesse. , 

Cest pourquoi Sa Hautesse veut que nous demandions 4 votre 
Excellence quelle est votre maniére de voir sur la conduite que la Sublime 
Porte doit tenir, et nous vous prions, en conséquence, de vouloir bien 
nous faire connaitre sans délai vos plans et vos opinions amicales sur 
cette affaire. 


(L.S.) MUSTAPHA RECHID. 


(Translation.) 


_ A COPY of the despatch received by the Sublime Porte from his 
Highness Mehemet Ali Pasha, anda copy of the despatch in detail which 
it has received from his Excellency Said Muhib Effendi, have been com- 

_municated to your Excellency, by which you have seen that Mehemet Ali 
Pasha has rejected some of the conditions which had been imposed upon 
him, and which are known. 

__ The hesitation of Mehemet Ali Pasha to accept these moderate con- 
ditions is scarcely compatible with the character of a subject, and it is 
no less clear that to grant the demands as made by him, is a thing as in- 
jurious as it is opposed to the rights of the Sultan’s sovereignty. 

Wherefore the Sultan desires that we should ask what are your 
Excellency’s sentiments as to the course to be pursued by the Sublime 


353 


Porte, and we request you in consequence to have the goodness to com- 
municate to us without delay your plans and your friendly opinions upon 
this matter. ; 


(Sealed) MUSTAPHA RECHID. 
nee ee TOS) Da SOb Jeup Ned oi GEO ai tie 
No. 216. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received April 7.) 


My Lord, | Therapia, March 17, 184i. 
I HAVE the honour to inclose, for your Lordship’s information, the 
copy of a despatch addressed to the Sublime Porte by Muhib Effendi, 
pea what took place at several interviews he had with Mehemet 
cD 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure in No. 216. 
Said Muhib Effendi to the Sublime Porte. 


Simesrction:) “Hemera 

SAMEDI, le septiéme jour de mon départ de Constantinople, vers les 
deux* heures, j’entrais, aprés une traversée heureuse, dans le port 
d’Alexandrie, ot: le paquebot jeta l’ancre. 

Zéki Effendi vint me saluer et me complimenter sur mon arrivée, au 
nom du Gouverneur d’Egypte, Son Altesse Méhémet Ali Pacha. | 

Nous nous préparions a aller a terre ensemble, lorsqu’une autre 
personne est venue de la part de Son Altesse pour demander si le firman 
Impérial devait étre lu ici ou au Caire. Je répondis que le firman devait 
étre lu d’abord ici, et puis au Caire, et qu’ensuite il fallait qu’il fat porté 
a la connaissance du public. En conséquence de ma réponse, Zéki 
Effendi me dit d’attendre une ou deux heures, afin que l’on préparat la 
troupe et la musique; et il nous quitta pour retourner a terre, en me 
disant qu'il allait revenir pour m’informer de ce qwil y avait 4 faire. 

Vers les cing heures, Zéki Effendi revint avec la felouque de Son 
Altesse; il me dit que les troupes et la musique étaient prétes; que Son 
Altesse m’attendait, et que nous pouvions partir. Je lui demandais si 
le firman allait étre lu. [1 répondit non, il faut que Son Altesse le voye 
d’abord. J’allais donc a terre dans la felouque de Son Altesse, accom- 
pagné de mon adjoint Shéfiq Bey. Lorsque je débarquais a }’échelle, 
les batimens que Son Altesse posséde sous les auspices du Sultan, et qui 
se trouvaient dans le port, furent pavoisés; l’on tira des coups de canon 
en signe de joie et de reconnaissance; et une compagnie de troupes de 
marine, dont les officiers étaient en grande tenue, vint, musique en téte, 
4 ma rencontre. ) 

Enfin, lorsque je me présentais chez le Pacha, Son Altesse, aprés une 
conversation indifférente, m’ayant demandé le firman dont j’étais porteur, 
je Je lui remis trés-respectueusement. a 

Son Altesse me fit lire d’abord la lettre du Grand Vizir, et puis le 
firman relatif A Vhérédité; aprés quoi, elle me dit: “La publication des 
conditions que ce firman renferme doit, dans un pays tel que celui-ci, 
causer des désordres.” Je lui répondis, que loin que la publication de ce 
firman puisse donner lieu a des désordres, il est en lui-méme une faveur 
éclatante dont tout le peuple et ceux qui l’entendront, auront a s’enor-. 
gueillir; et conformément 4 mes instructions, je fis tout Pusage que je 


* A huit heures a peu prés du matin. 


2Z 


304 


puis de ma langue et de mon jugement pour l’amener a de meilleurs: 


sentimens, en l’y disposant par des propos encourageans et par les 


menaces nécessaires; et je lui représentai que la nature de cette affaire 


exigeait que le firman fat lu dans une assemblée solennelle, et porté a la 
connaissance du public. Le Pacha répliqua: “Que Dieu conserve notre 
Padichah et bienfaiteur! je suis ’esclave du Sultan. Je ne saurais lui 
témoigner assez de reconnaissance pour la faveur dont je viens d’étre 
Vobjet, et il est de mon devoir d’exécuter promptement tous ses ordres ; 
mais comme la lecture en public de ce firman, dans ce moment-ci, 
présente quelques inconvéniens, nous en parlerons plus tard, et nous 
verrons ce quwil y aura a faire.” Je lui dis alors que les conditions dont 
il s’agit ont été établies avec le concours des Hautes Cours Alliées, que 
la volonté de Sa Hautesse a cet égard est positive, et que lhérédité tient 
a ces conditions. Mais comme Son Altesse avait dit que nous verrons 
tout cela aprés, Sami Bey, qui était aussi présent, prenant la parole: 
“T,Effendi,” dit il, “est fatigué du voyage; que Votre Altesse lui 


permette d’aller reposer.” A ces mots, la séance fut levée, et je me rendis. 


a la maison de Sami Bey, qui m’avait été destinée. 

Lundi je me rendis de nouveau auprés du Pacha. “ Comment vous 
portez-vous, mon fils ?” demanda Son Altesse ; “ Ktes-vous bien ? Avez-vous 
reposé ?” A ces questions je répondis: “ Je suis & mon aise, parceque, 
grace a Dieu, les démélés et les différends qui ont pendant quelque tems 
trainé en longueur, venant de cesser sous les auspices de Sa Majesté 
Impériale, il n’y a plus aucune scission, aucune division. Cependant, les 
propos que Votre Altesse a tenus l’autre jour tendant a faire voir que 
quelques unes des conditions dont il s’agit ne sauraient vous convenir, et 
qwil n’est pas convenable de lire publiquement le Firman Impérial, m’ont 
extrémement affligé.” 

“ Mon fils,” répliqua le Pacha, “la lecture publique du firman est 
sujette 4 une foule d’inconvéniens. En premier leu, je demande, com- 
ment peut-on gouverner |’Egypte avec cenombre de troupes ?” ‘“ Grace a 
Dieu, il n’y aplus en Egypte des troubles d’aucune espéce ; et ce nombre de 
troupes a été jugé suffisant pour la défense du pays.” “Fort bien, fort bien! 
mais ce pays-ci est la clef de l Afrique, la clef méme, peut-étre, de Con- 
stantinople. Et quoiqu’il n’y ait pas de troubles ici, il est de Pintérét de 
la Sublime Porte qu’il y ait beaucoup de troupes en Egypte; car, lorsqu’on 
en aura besoin, comme en cas d’une guerre, je pourrais envoyer la quan- 
tité de troupes qu’on me demandera et qu’on m’ordonnera d’envoyer.” 
“Ti faut effectivement que Votre Altesse rende ces sortes de services a la 
Sublime Porte; et c’est ce que nous espérons.” ‘Mais supposé méme, 
Dieu garde, que quelque événement ait lieu en Afrique ;:eh bien ?” “ Alors, 


aussitét qu’on laura fait connaitre 4 la Sublime Porte, et qu’on aura. 


demandé son autorisation pour lever le nombre de nouvelles troupes qui 
sera jugé nécessaire, nul doute que la Sublime Porte n’accorde cette permis- 
sion, et n’y donne son assistance nécessaire, d’apres lexigeance du cas. 


Le nombre de troupes, tel qu’il vient d’étre fixé, est suffisant.” “ Puisque 


la Sublime Porte doit m’accorder l’autorisation que je lui demanderai au 
besoin, et quelle m’y donnera son assistance, ce que vous dites est raison- 
nable; et le nombre fixé 4 présent parait, en effet, suffisant pour la dé- 
fense de la Province d’Egypte. Ainsi, je séparerai des troupes qui 
arrivent de la Syrie, et de celles qui se trouvent ici, les hommes peu propres 
au service ; et mettant en exécution la volonté du Sultan a cet égard je 
n’emploierai pas plus de troupes que le nombre qui a été fixé; et toutes les 
fois qu’on aura, besoin de troupes, et qu’on m’en demandera, j’aurai soin de 
Jes équiper, et je m’empresserai de les expédier A tel endroit qu’on voudra.” 

Tel est Pengagement pris par Son Altesse. Quant ala flotte existante 
en Egypte, attendu qu’elle fait partie de la flotte Impériale, le Pacha a 
donné sa parole positive que, comme pour les troupes de terre, toutes les 
fois que la Sublime Porte demandera un tel nombre de bitimens, ou toute 
la flotte, il ne manquera pas d’expédier sans aucun délai tel nombre de 
batimens qu’on lui aura demandé, et méme toute la flotte, au grand com- 
plet; quwil renonce a faire construire un plus grand nombre de batimens ; 
et qu'il ne fera pas construire un nouveau batiment pour remplacer cehii 


355 


qui ne sera pas en état de tenir la mer, qu’aprés en avoir obtenu la permis- 
sion de la Sublime Porte. 

Le Pacha s’engagea aussi de se conformer, par rapport A la monnaie, 
a ce qui est prescrit par le Firman, et a faire battre des monnaies sur les 
modéles qui lui seront envoyés de l’Hotel Impérial des monnaies. 

Le Pacha demanda, “Comment peut-on changer les soldats une fois 
chaque cing ans, ainsi qu’il est dit dans le firman, et dans le code des 
réglemens Impériaux?” “Considérant que les soldats formant les troupes 
réglées Impériales, se trouvent depuis longtems éloignés de leur pays 
natal, et de leurs familles, et que quelques fois leurs affaires sont en souf- 
france, il vient d’étre inséré dans le code des réglemens, par ordre de Sa 
Hautesse, qu’au bout de cing ans on changera, par compassion, ceux des 
soldats qui désirent étre remplacés. Or, puisque l’Egypte fait partie des 
Ktats de Sa Hautesse, que ses habitans sont les sujets de la Sublime Porte, 
et que les troupes Egyptiennes font partie des armées réglées Impériales, 
Votre Altesse doit mettre ses soins a agir a ce sujet d’aprés la volonté 
Souveraine.” “ I] faut, il est vrai, que les troupes Egyptiennes servent aussi 
d’aprés le code des réglemens Impériaux. Mais les Arabes ne ressemblent 
point au peuple de la Roumélie. I] faut 4 un soldat pour le moins cing 
ans pour apprendre a faire l’exercice du pas: cela étant, si au bout de 
chaque cinq ans il faut les remplacer par d’autres, ce ne serait plus des 
troupes réglées, mais tout uniment des troupes irréguliéres qu’on aurait. 
Vous le savez vous-méme; le naturel des hommes d’un pays de la 
Roumélie différe de celui des hommes d’un autre pays. Les soldats de 
ces contrées-ci doivent étre remplacés une fois les quinze ans; parceque, 
supposé qu’on les remplace chaque cinq ans, alors et l’agriculture en 
souffrira et les troupes ne seront pas des troupes vraiment régliées. Enfin, 
je connais moi |’état des choses de ce pays-ci parfaitement bien, et je vous 
dis la vérité toute nue. Je suis tout-d-fait excusable en cela, et je suis 
obligé de prier qu’on me favorise sur ce point. Et puis le firman Impé- 
rial dit que le Gouverneur d’Egypte ne doit pas conférer un grade supé- 
rieur a celui de Col-Aghassi*. Or, j’étais autorisé auparavant 4 donner 
méme le grade de Général de Brigade. Comment puis-je faire ce que l’on 
propose maintenant, tandis que jusqu’ici j’ai donné des grades militaires 
sans avoir a en demander l’autorisation ?” 

Le Pacha ayant parlé dans ce sens-la, je lui répondis de la maniére 
suivante: “ Effectivement vous étiez autorisé par le passé a donner des 
grades militaires, mais le systéme suivi alors était bon pour ces tems-la. 
A présent, Dieu en soit loué, tout a changé, et méme les Mouchirs et les 
Vizirs, qui sont dans la nécessité d’avoir des troupes réglées Impériales 
auprés deux, ne peuvent pas conférer un grade au-dessus de Col- 
Aghassi, qu’au préalable ils n’en ayent obtenu lautorisation. Or, vos 
troupes étant considérées comme des troupes réglées Impériales, il est 
flatteur pour Votre Altesse de demander l’autorisation de donner des rangs 
militaires.”” “‘ Eh, bien, mon fils, ce point est tout-a-fait insignifiant pour 
la Sublime Porte. Les serviteurs jouissent, suivant les mérites, de 
différens degrés de faveurs auprés de leurs maitres. Ne pas étre a présent 
autorisé A faire ce que j’étais autorisé a faire autrefois, c’est une chose 
qui me fera du tort. Je dois donc indispensablement demander et prier 
d’avoir lautorisation que j’ai eu jusquiici.” ‘ Monseigneur, pourquoi 
dites-vous que ce point ne signifie rien? Les troupes réglées sont, pour 
ainsi dire, l’Ame de la Sublime Porte, et c’est un devoir pour nous tous de 
maintenir tous les réglemens qui les concernent.” ‘Oui, sans doute c’est 
un devoir pour nous tous de maintenir les réglemens qui les concernent ; 
mais moi je ne parle que de Vautorisation dont je dois étre revétu comme 
je Vai déja dit.” 6. } 

C’est en vain que j’ai tant raisonné sur ce point; tous les moyens de 
persuasion ont échoué ; c’est-a-dire, qu’il ne m/’a pas été possible de le faire 
accéder a la proposition. 

Je parlais de l’envoi 4 Constantinople de l’un de ses fils.“ Ce sera 
trés bien,” dit le Pacha, “(mais lequel enverrai-je? Enverrai-je mon 


* Grade immédiatement au-dessous de celui de Chef de Bataillon. 


224 2 


306 


petit-fils Abbas Pacha?” “A ces questions je répondis : “ i vaut wen 
que Votre Altesse envoie un de ses fils qui présenterait ses : hs. a 2 
Majesté [mpériale, et qui ferait la connaissance des Ministi es de la Sub- 
lime Porte; ce qui fera plaisir 4 Sa Hautesse.” “Cela étant, comme mon 
fils Said Bey est un jeune homme lettré, qui parle Persan, Arabe, Fran- 
cais, et Anglais, et qui est un marin instruit, crest Ini que j enyerral ay 
printems prochain, s’il plait 4 Dieu, 4 Constantinople, accompagne de 
Sami Bey. Lope gh hy 1 ‘ 

“ Le firman qui parle del hérédité,” ajouta le Pacha, “ dit que lorsque, 
par la volonté de Dieu, il y aura vacance dans le Gouvernement d Egypte, 
la Sublime Porte élira un des membres de ma famille, et l’appellera a 
Constantinople afin quil y soit nommé Gouverneur de la province 
@Egypte. Mais il est évident qu’une pareille disposition fera naitre des 
dissensions, et peut-étre méme une guerre entre les membres de ma fa- 
mille. _Je ne veux pas moi, étant en vie, exposer ma famille a de pareils 
malheurs, parcequ’en effet, si on allait nommer Gouverneur le cadet, tan- 
dis que lainé existe, cela ferait naitre entre eux une froideur qui évidem- 
ment dégénérerait, 4 la longue, en dissensions et en troubles.” _ 

“Dieu ayant donné a chaque homme un degré plus ou moins grand 
desprit et de jugement, il y aura, dans chaque membre de votre famille 
aussi plus ou moins de capacité ; or, si on donne le Gouvernement de 
V’Egypte a celui des membres de la famille qui montre les meilleures dis- 
positions a bien gouverner, et celui-ci gouverne avec cette sagesse et ce 
jugement dont il est doué, voila le repos et la tranquillité de votre famille 
assurés. La Sublime Porte y a réfléchi plus que Votre Altesse, et a cet 
égard aussi la volonté Souveraine est telle que je le dis.” ‘‘ Non, non, le 
grand n’obéira pas au petit; il y aura des dissensions et des querelles 
parmi les membres de la famille qui finiront tous par étre dispersés; ce 
qui est aussi clair que le jour. Quand Dieu permettra qu’il y ait vacance, 
comment pourra-t-on savoir d’abord lequel des membres de ma famille est 
le plus capable de gouverner ?”’ ‘‘ Monseigneur, votre famille nest pas a 
comparer a d’autres familles; elle est connue, célébre, et par conséquent 
chacun de ses membres est bien connu a4 la Sublime Porte, ainsi qu’a leurs 
Excellences les Ministres vos confréres.” 

Voila ce que je répondis au Pacha, mais Son Altesse répliqua: “II 
n'est pas possible de voir tout d’abord lequel des membres de la famille est 
le plus capable. En un mot, dorénavant, lorsqu’avec la permission du 
Ciel, la place de Gouverneur sera devenue vacante, Painé de ma famille, 
qui sera jugé capable d’étre Gouverneur, doit étre proposé dans une 
pétition de la part de toute la notabilité de VEgypte, des Oulémas, et des 
personnes qui se trouvent dans ma famille et dans mon département ; et 
aprés cela la Sublime Porte devra accueillir leur demande, accorder le 
Gouvernement a celui-la, et l'appeler aussi 4 Constantinople pour cela.’ 
Dieu sait si j’ai employé tous les raisonnemens possibles pour le con- 
vaincre ; mais le Pacha ne fit que répéter ces propres argumens. Bref, il 
finit par me dire qu'il ne peut pas, lui, de son vivant, laisser sa famille en 
danger, et qwil priera Sa Hautesse de lui accorder sa demande. 

Lorsque je parlais au Pacha de l’envoi au trésor Impérial du quart 
des revenus de l Egypte ainsi que cela est expressément dit dans le firman 
sur Vhérédité, Son Altesse répondit: “Les revenus fixes de Egypte 
ne peuvent pas faire face aux dépenses ordinaires. Si Von demande 
comment donc se payent tant de dépenses, je réponds qu’elles se payent 
des produits des fermes que moi, mes fils, et mes petits-fils nous possédons 
sous les auspices de Sa Hautesse, et des produits du commerce. Je 
ne sais ce qu’il ya a dire a cela.” “Si lon envoie au trésor Impérial 
le quart des revenus de |’Egypte, le tiers et les deux tiers du reste 
suffisent certainement a faire face aux dépenses de Votre Altesse, et il y 
en a méme de trop peut-étre, parceque vous avez, d’aprés la volonté 
Souveraine, réduit ’armée, et que vous ne devez plus faire construire de 
nouveaux batimens de guerre.” ‘Mon fils, vous me comprenez fort bien ; 
mais je crois que vous voulez me pousser a bout.’”? ‘Dieu m’en préserve ! 

it pourquoi me prétez-vous de mauvaises intentions? Le payement a 
Ja Sublime Porte du quart des revenus est une condition attachée a 
Vhérédité, un point arrété de commun accord avec les Hautes Cours 


397 


Alliées, et la volonté de Sa Hautesse a cet égard est positive. Ainsi, 
c’est dans vos propres intéréts, et dans ceux de votre famille que je 
tiens ce langage. Rejeter cette condition, ce qu’ Dieu ne plaise! ou une 
seule des autres conditions, c’est donner lieu A une nouvelle effusion de 
Sang, qui est une chose terrible. Moi je parle 4 Votre Altesse sincére- 
ment. Elle agira comme elle jugera a propos.” “Ce n’est pas que 
je veuille montrer de V’hésitation ou de lopposition. Les Hautes Puis- 
sances Alliées, nos amies, ont de la discrétion; elles savent ce que c’est 
que Péquité; elles n’employent pas la contrainte la ot il serait injuste 
de la faire. Elles comprendront, en jugeant la chose équitablement, 
que lorsque la quatriéme partie des revenus sort d’un pays, ce pays se 
ruine. Cette province est une possession de la Sublime Porte; qu’elle soit 
florissante, ou ruinée, un et Vautre de ces états touchent de prés cet 
Empire. Enfin, cette condition est tout-d-fait au-dessus de mes 
forces, c’est une condition impossible.” ‘‘Monseigneur, la Sublime Porte 
n’a jusqu’a présent donné l’hérédité a4 aucun de ses serviteurs. C’est 
donc, pour ainsi dire, un devoir pour Votre Altesse d’offrir tous les ans, en 
vous en glorifiant, le quart des revenus de ce pays-ci au trésor Im- 
périal, ainsi que Sa Hautesse le veut, en témoignage de votre recon- 
naissance pour cette faveur; le Sultan a droit a cela.”” “Et moi et le 
pays nous appartenons au Sultan: je ne refuse rien; mais je ne vois 
aucune modération en cela pour que je puisse m’y montrer disposé. Et 
quand méme, par supposition, j’obéissais aux ordres Souverains, cet 
argent ne pourra pas étre payé, et vous direz, voyez-vous, Méhémet Ali 
se met de nouveau sur la voie des oppositions. A la vérité, je ne peux 
dire, oui; je ferai-une chose qui est hors de mon pouvoir. Je fais con- 
naitre la vérité du fait, et je prie d’étre favorisé 4 cet égard de la part 
de Sa Hautesse.’’ ‘‘ Mais, Monseigneur, les revenus de la province 
d’Egypte sont connus de tout le monde, et la demande d’un quart de 
ces revenus est une demande modérée. Votre Altesse n’aura plus dé- 
sormais de trop grandes dépenses a faire; mais supposons méme que 
quelque chose exigeant de grandes dépenses survienne, Votre Altesse 
pourra s’entendre la-dessus avec la Sublime Porte.” 

Dans les trois ou quatre entrevues que j’eus avec le Pacha, je 
tachai de le persuader quil serait fort 4 propos qu’il prit engagement 
dont il s’agit, parcequ’il aurait ainsi rendu service au trésor Impérial; ce 
qui aurait été un sujet de contentement pour tous les Ministres de la 
Sublime Porte; et je lui dis bien des choses dans ce but. Mais loin de 
m’écouter, il répéta les mémes objections, et il y insista. Je lui dis de 
nouveau: ‘ Monseigneur, j’ai osé vous importuner en vous disant tant de 
choses pour votre propre bien et pour celui de votre famille; tout cela 
n’a abouti a rien. Eh bien! que Votre Altesse fasse connaitre précisé- 
ment ses intentions et ses désirs a la Sublime Porte, et nous verrons quelle 
réponse viendra.”” “Je suis le serviteur et l’esclave du Sultan notre maitre. 
J’écrirai la vérité toute pure, que j’accompagnerai de ma priére; leurs 
Excellences les Ministres de la Sublime Porte savent ce que c’est que la 
justice.” Pee : MA 

Comme aprés tout.cela, tout ce que j’aurais dit n’aurait servi a rien, 
je pris le parti de me taire, et de lever la séance. 

Lorsque nous mimes en avant les questions de Vhabillement, des 
pavillons des batimens, des drapeaux des troupes, et d’autres réglemens, 
“‘ Mais, oh mon cher,” dit le Pacha, ‘les uniformes des troupes de quel- 
ques Puissances différent les uns des autres. Il y a dans les troupes 
Russes trois sortes d’uniforme: quel mal y a-t-il en cela? Chaque Puis- 
sance a son systéme et ses réglemens ; ce n’est pas le cas de les discuter.” 
“Je dirai seulement, que puisque Votre Altesse est un des plus illustres 
Vizirs de Empire, que Egypte aussi est une partie de cet Empire, et 
comme Votre Altesse le sait fort bien, il est devenu un usage, pour ainsi dire, 
que les Vizirs et les habitans en Turquie s’habillent comme les Ministres et 
les Employés A Constantinople; il est essentiel que Votre Altesse adapte 
chacun de ses systémes et de ses réglemens a ceux de la Sublime Porte. 
«C’est fort bien, mon fils, moi je ne m’y oppose pas; Mol AUss! Je désire 
prendre l’habit d’ordonnance. Mais les hommes ici sont un peu plus 


358 


difficultueux qu’ailleurs. Le changement de costume est vraiment une de 
ces choses qui doivent se faire peu 4 peu; remettez-vous en a moi, et je 
ferai le nécessaire en tems et lieu; c’est-d-dire je ferai changer de cos- 
tume 4 tous. Quant au pavillon des batimens de guerre, il est tout-d-fait 
le méme que celui des batimens de la flotte Impériale; seulement les 
drapeaux des troupes étaient jusqu’ici blancs; lorsqu’on en enverra de 
Constantinople des modéles, j’en ferai faire de pareils aussi. 

Je fis prendre au Pacha les engagemens ci-dessus. 

Le Pacha me dit: “D’aprés les mémes principes équitables sur 
lesquels les nouvelles réformes sont basées, chacun ici est stir de son bien 
et de sa vie; et tous mettent leurs soins et leur attention a agir en consé- 
quence sur ces points essentiels. I] n’y a que l’assiette des impéts qu’on 
ne peut adapter dans un pays comme celui-ci au systéme établi par les 
réformes; parceque l’on percoit des habitans, avec la dime, un impdét 
annuel’connu sous la dénomination “ d’Hradjiyé,” dont le quantum en 
argent dépend de l’étendue des terres que chacun posséde. “ Hradjiyé” 
est proprement le loyer de ces terres. On ne prend rien de plus 4 titre 
d’impét. Ces pays ne sauraient, en aucune maniére, étre assimilés aux 
pays de la Roumélie. Supposé que Von veuille abolir Pancien systéme 
pour lui en substituer un nouveau; eh bien, dans ce cas, vu le caractére 
singulier des Arabes, l’ancien systéme serait tout-a-fait désorganisé, et 
cela aurait a la fin apporté du désordre. Ainsi, que la Sublime Porte 
s’en rapporte 4 ma maniére de voir pour Varrangement de pareilles 
affaires.” 

Voila ce que le Pacha finit par me dire. 

Jereprésentai au Pacha que Sa Hautesse veut que le premier régiment 
des troupes de ligne Impériales de Marine, ainsi que les milices de la 
province de Brousse, soient renvoyés complétement 4 Constantinople, de 
quelque part qu’ils puissent étre. “Ces régimens avaient été expédiés en 
Syrie. Jusqu’a présent aucune partie de ces troupes n’est revenu ici. It 
est 4 croire que quelques hommes de ces régimens sont devenus ‘“ Cavass,”’ 
et que la plupart des autres sont allés de Beyrout a Constantinople. Le 
Colonel des Milices, Yadighiar Hassan Bey, est seulement venu en Egypte 
avec Ibrahim Pacha. Si dorénavant des soldats appartenans a ces 
régimens arrivent ici, je les enverrai immédiatement 4 Constantinople 
conformément a la volonté Souveraine.”’ 


D’aprés les instructions que j’avais recues, j’ai fait tous mes efforts, 
comme Dieu le sait, pour remplir ma mission conformément aux désirs 
de la Sublime Porte; mais le Pacha, mettant en avant les inconvéniens 
qui, dans sa maniére de voir, existent relativement au quart des revenus et 
i la succession dans sa famille, n’a pas acquiescé a ces points. A grande 
peine ai-je pu lui faire prendre engagement de faire réduire ses troupes, 
de ne pas faire construire des bAtimens sans en avoir obtenu la permission, 
de battre la monnaie de la maniére indiquée, et de faire les autres choses, 
ainsi que Sa Hautesse le veut. En parlant de sa famille, je lui dis aussi: 
“Votre Altesse veut que la succession ait a passer, comme une condition 
établie, de lainé a Painé, mais il y a des inconvéniens a cela. Et entre 
autres, le ci-devant Begler Bey de Tripoli de Barbarie, Mustapha Pacha, 
fils de Youssouf Pacha, n’ayant pas été capable de gouverner, le pays a 
été en proie aux désordres, et un autre Gouverneur fut A la fin nommé et 
envoyé par la Sublime Porte 4 Tripoli. Or, ’Egypte est une des plus 
importantes Provinces de Empire. Cela étant, et vu que l’on ne sait 
pas ce qui peut arriver avec le tems, la Sublime Porte, qui pense a tout, a 
jugé convenable la mesure qu’elle a adoptée.” ‘“ Effendi, mon fils, vous 
avez raison; mais mes enfans étant des hommes lettrés, des hommes sensés, 
il n’y a pas un pareil inconvénient A craindre.” “Tl est vrai, Altesse 
que vos fils qui existent 4 présent sont des hommes sensés et judicieux; 
mais de génération en génération, le Gouvernement de VEgypte peut 
échoir 4 un homme sans jugement, et alors, A Dieu ne plaise, on peut 
s’attendre a ce que la province soit en désordre, que la scission se mette 
dans votre famille, et qu’il survienne d’autres maux qui ne se présentent 
pas a esprit dans ce moment-ci. L’histoire nous offre une foule d’ex- 
emples de choses semblables arrivées autrefois. Peut-étre méme Votre 


309 


Altesse a-t-elle été témoin de pareils événemens qui touchent de prés la 
Sublime Porte.” ‘Ce pays appartient ala Sublime Porte. Si le Gouverne- 
ment de ce pays tombait entre les mains d’un homme incapable, la Sublime 
Porte le saurait, on le lui écrirait méme d'ici; et comme elle ne laissera pas 
le pays en désordre, il n’y aura aucune espéce de difficulté pour elle de con- 
férer le Gouvernement de la Province a un digne sujet, et elle en a le droit.” 

_ Voila ce que le Pacha finit par dire, en conséquence de quoi j’ai 
rédigé et divisé par paragraphes le présent rapport, qui ne renferme que 
la troisiéme partie de mes discussions avec Méhémet Ali; je Penvoie avec 
une lettre de sa part a Son Altesse le Grand Vizir, et j’attendrai a 
Alexandrie la réponse de la Sublime Porte. 


(Translation.) 
5 Monarrem, 1257, 
February 27, Idi]. 

ON Saturday about two o’clock*, the seventh day after my departure from 
Constantinople, after a favourable passage, I entered the port of Alexandria 
where the packet came to an anchor. 

Zeki Effendi came to salute me and to compliment me on my arrival, in the 
name of the Governor of Egypt, his Highness Mehemet Ali Pasha. 

We were preparing to land together, when another person came from his 
Highness to ask whether the Imperial firman was to be read here or at Cairo ? 
I replied, that the firman ought, in the first place, to be read here, and then at 
Cairo, and that it should afterwards be made known to the public. In conse- 
quence of my reply, Zeki Effendi told me to wait an hour or two, in order that a 
guard and band of music might be prepared ; and he left us to return on snore, 
telling me that he would return to inform me what there would be to do. 

About five o’clock, Zeki Effendi returned with the boat of his Highness; 
he told me that the guards and the band were ready; that his Highness 
awaited me, and that we might depart. I asked him whether the firman was 
going to be read? He replied, ‘“‘ No; it is necessary that his Highness should 
see it first.’ I therefore landed in his Highness’s boat, accompanied by my 
assistant Shefig Bey. When I disembarked at the landing place, the vessels 
which, under the auspices of the Sultan, His Highness possesses, and which were 
in the harbour, were decorated with flags. Cannon were fired in token of joy 
and gratitude; and a company of marines, the officers of which were in full 
uniform, with the band at their head, came to meet me. 

At length, when I presented myself to the Pasha, his Highness after a 
conversation on indifferent matters, having asked me for the firman of which f 
was the bearer, I delivered it to him very respectfully. 

His Highness first of all made me read the letter of the Grand Vizier, and 
then the firman respecting the hereditary dignity ; atter which he said to me, 
‘<The publication of the conditions which this firman contains must cause great 
disorders in such a country as this.”’ I answered him, that far from the publi- 
cation of this firman giving rise to disorders, it is in itself a striking favour, 
_ which all the people and those who may hear it will have cause to be proud of; 
and, in conformity with my instructions, I made every use 1 could of my 
language and my judgment to bring him to a better way of thinking, by making 
encouraging statements and using the necessary menaces; and I represented to 
him that the nature of this affair required that the firman should be read in a 
solemn assembly, and made known to the public. The Pasha replied: ‘‘ May 
God preserve our Padishah and benefactor! I am the slave of the Sultan. I 
cannot show him sufficient gratitude for the favour of which I have just been the 
object, and it is my duty to execute promptly all his orders. But as the reading 
of this firman publicly presents some inconvenience at the present moment, we 
will talk about it afterwards, and we will see what there is to be done.’ I then 
told him that the conditions in question have been agreed upon with the concur- 
rence of the High Allied Courts; that the will of His Highness is positive in 
this respect, and that the hereditary government depends upon these conditions. 
But as his Highness had said that we should see about all that afterwards, Sami 
Bey, who was also present, taking up the conversation, said: ‘‘ The Effendi is 


* About 8 o'clock in the morning. 


360 


tired with his voyage; will your Highness permit him to go and repose.” At 
these words the meeting broke up, and I repaired to the house of Sami Bey 
which had been assigned to me. ' 

On Monday I went again to the Pasha. ‘‘ How do you do, my son?’ 
asked his Highness; “ Are you well? Have you rested ?”” ‘To these questions 
I answered: ‘I am at ease, because, thanks to God, the quarrels and the dif- 
ferences which have been so long protracted, being now about to cease under the 
auspices of His Imperial Majesty, there is no longer any schism, any division. 
Nevertheless the’ sentiments which your Highness expressed the’ other day 
tending to show that some of the conditions in question would not suit you, and 
that it is not expedient to read the Imperial firman publicly, have grieved me 
excessively.” : a . 

“My son,” replied the Pasha, “the reading of the firman publicly is subject 
to a number of inconveniences. In the first place I ask, how can Egypt be 
governed with that number of troops ?”—“ Thanks to God there are no longer 
any troubles of any kind in Egypt ; and that number of troops has been deemed 
sufficient for the defence of the country.”—‘“ Very well, very well! But this 
country is the key of Africa, perhaps even the key of Constantinople. And 
although there are no disturbances here, it is the interest of the Sublime Porte 
that there should be a large amount of troops in Egypt; for when they are 
required, as in case of a war, I should be able to send the number of troops I 
might be asked for and ordered to send.”—“‘ It is indeed meet that your High- 
ness should render these kind of services to the Sublime Porte; and it is what 
we expect.” —‘ But suppose even, which God forbid, that any event should take 
place in Africa ; what then ?”—‘“‘ Then, as soon as it shall have been made known 
to the Sublime Porte, and that its authority shall have been asked to raise the 
number of fresh troops which may be judged necessary, no doubt the Sublime , 
Porte will grant that permission, and will give the necessary assistance according 
to the urgency of the case. The number of troops, such as it has been fixed, is 
sufficient.” ‘‘Since the Sublime Porte is to grant me the permission which I 
may ask for in case of need, and that it will give me its assistance, that which 
you say is reasonable ; and the number now fixed appears in truth sufficient for 
the defence of the province of Egypt. ‘Thus I shall discharge the men who are 
_ not fit for service from the troops which may arrive from Syria and frem those 
which are now here; and, carrying the will of the Sultan into execution in this 
respect, [ will not employ more troops than the number which has been fixed ; 
and at all times when troops may be required and that I shall be asked for them, 
I shall take care to equip them, and [ shall hasten to send them to whatever 
place they may be required at.” 

Such is the engagement taken by his Highness. With regard to the fleet 
existing in Egypt, inasmuch as it forms a portion of the Imperial fleet, the 
Pasha has given his word positively, that, in like manner as with the land 
forces, whenever the Porte shall require a certain number of vessels, or all the 
fleet, he will not fail to send such a number of vessels as he may have been 
called upon to furnish, and even the whole fleet, at its full complement. That 
he gives up the right of building a larger number of vessels; and that he will 
not cause a new vessel to be built to replace any one that may be unfit to go to 
sea, without having obtained the permission of the Sublime Porte. 

The Pasha also engaged to conform to what is prescribed by the firman 
with respect to the coinage, and to cause the money to be coined according to 
the patterns which will be sent to him from the Imperial mint. 

The Pasha asked, ‘* How can the soldiers be changed once in every five 
years, as it is stated in the firman and in the code of Imperial regulations?” 
“Considering that the soldiers composing the Imperial regular troops are 
for a long time removed from their native country and their families, and that 
sometimes their affairs suffer thereby, it has been settled in the code of recula- 
tions by His Highness’s order, that those soldiers who may desire it shall be 
changed out of compassion at the expiration of five years. Now, since Keypt 
forms a part of the territories of His Highness, since its inhabitants are the 
subjects of the Sublime Porte, and since the Egyptian troops form a part of the 
zmperial regular armies, your Highness should take pains to act in this matter 
according to the sovereign pleasure.”—‘‘It is necessary, it is true, that the 
Sgyptian troops should serve according to the code of the Imperial regulations. 
But the Arabs do not at all resemble the people of Roumelia. A soldier requires 


361 


at least five years to learn how to march; this being the case, if at the end of 
every five years they are to be replaced by others, there would no longer be 
regular troops, but simply irregular troops. You are aware of it yourself: the 
character of the men of one district of Roumelia differs from that of the men of 
another district. The soldiers of these parts ought to be replaced once every 
fifteen years; because, supposing them to be replaced every five years, in that 
case both agriculture would suffer, and. the troops will not be really regular 
troops. In short, I know the state of things in this country perfectly well, and 
{ tell you the plain truth... I am quite justified in this, and I am obliged to beg 
that 1 may be favoured on this point. And then the firman says that the 
Governor of Egypt must not confer a rank above that of Col-Aghassi*. Now, 
I have hitherto been authorized to confer the rank even of Brigadier-General. 
How can I do what is now proposed, whilst hitherto I have conferred military 
rank without having to ask authority for so doing ?” 

The Pasha having spoken in the above sense, I replied to him in the following 
manner: ‘* You were in truth authorized heretofore to confer military rank ; 
but the system then followed was good for those times. Now, praise be to God, 
everything has changed, and even the Muchirs and the Viziers who are obliged 
to have Imperial regular troops about them, cannot confer a rank above that of 
Col-Aghassi, without having previously obtained authority to do so. Now, your 
troops being looked upon as Imperial regular troops, it is flattering to your 
Highness to ask authority to confer military rank.”’—‘* Well, my son, this point 
is quite insignificant for the Sublime Porte. Servants enjoy different degrees of 
favour with their masters, according to their deserts. Not to be allowed to do 
now that which I was allowed to do formerly, is a thing which would do me 
harm. I must, therefore, indispensably request and entreat to have the authority 
which I have had hitherto.””—< My Lord, why do you say that this point 
signifies nothing 2? The regular troops are, so to say, the soul of the Sublime 
Porte, and it is the duty of all of us to maintain the regulations which relate 
to them.”—*‘ Yes, without doubt it is the duty of all of us to maintain the regu- 
lations which relate to them; but I only speak of the authority with which I 
ought to be invested, as I have already said.” 

It was in vain that I argued so much on this point ; all the means of per- 
suasion failed; that is to say, it.was impossible for me to make him accede to the 
proposition. 

I spoke of the mission of one of his sons to Constantinople. _‘* That will be 
very well,” said the Pasha, ‘but which of them shall I send? Shall I send my 
grandson Abbas Pasha?” To these questions I replied: “ It would be better for 
your Highness to send one of your sons who should present your respects to 
His Imperial Majesty, and who should make the acquaintance of the Ministers 
of the Sublime Porte; which will. please His Highness.”—‘‘ That being the 
case, as my son Said Bey is a well-informed young man, who speaks Persian, 
Arabic, French, and English, and who is. a skillful sailor, I will send him next 
spring, if it pleases God, to Constantinople, accompanied by Sami Bey.” 

«The firman which makes mention of the hereditary succession,” added 
the Pasha, ‘‘ says, that whenever, by the will of God, there shall be a vacancy 
in the Government of Egypt, the Sublime Porte shall choose one of the members 
of my family, and shall summon him to Constantinople, in order that he may be 
there named Governor of the Province of Egypt. But it is evident that such an 
arrangement will give rise to dissensions, and, perhaps, even to a war between 
the members of my family. I will not, as long as I live, expose my family to such 
misfortunes, because, in fact, if the youngest were named Governor, while the 
eldest is in existence, this would cause a coldness to spring up between them, 
which would evidently in the long run degenerate into dissensions and 
troubles.” 

“God having given to every man a greater or less degree of cleverness 
and judgment, each member of your family will also have more or less capacity ; 
now, if the Government of Egypt is given to that one of the members ot the 
family who manifests the greatest disposition to govern well, and that one 
governs with the wisdom and judgment with which he is endowed, the tranquil- 
lity and repose of your family is hereby ensured. The Sublime Porte has 
reflected on this more than your Highness has’ done, and in this respect also the 


* Rank immediately below that of Chef de Batallion. 
8S A 


362: 


sovereign will is such as I state it to be.”’—“ No, no, the great will not obey the 
little ; there will be dissensions and quarrels among the members of the family, 
who will end by being all dispersed ; which is as clear as day. When God shall 
be pleased to give a vacancy, how can it then at once be known who among the 
members of my family is the most capable of governing ?” —‘‘ My Lord, your 
family is not to be compared with other families ; it is known, celebrated, and 
consequently every one of its members is well known at the Sublime Porte, as 
well as by their Excellencies the Ministers, your colleagues.” 

The above is what I answered to the Pasha, but his Highness rejoined : 
«Tt is not possible to discern all at once which of the members of the family is 
the most capable. In a word, henceforward, when, by the permission of 
Heaven, the post of Governor shall have become vacant, the eldest of my family 
who shall be pronounced capable of being Governor, must be proposed in a 
petition on the part of all the notables of Egypt, the Ulemas, and the persons 
who ate in my family and in my department; and after that the Sublime Porte 
shall comply with their request, confer the Government upon him, and summon 
him to Constantinople for that purpose.” God knows that I employed all the 
reasoning possible to convince him ; but the Pasha only repeated these same argu- 
ments. In short, he concluded by saying, that he cannot, during his life- 
time, leave his family in danger, and that he will entreat His Highness to grant 
his request. 

When I spoke to the Pasha of sending a fourth part of the revenues of 
Egypt to the Imperial treasury, as that is expressly stated in the firman regard- 
ing the hereditary dignity, his Highness replied: ‘‘ The established revenues of 
Egypt cannot meet the current expences. If it is asked how so many expences 
are paid, I answer that they are paid out of the produce of the farms which I, 
and my sons, and my grandsons, possess, under His Highness’s auspices, and 
out of what is produced by commerce. I do not know what can be said to that.” 
‘<If a quarter of the revenues of Egypt is sent to the Imperial treasury, the 
third, and the two-thirds of the remainder are certainly enough to meet the 
expences of your Highness, and there is, perhaps, even too much, because, 
according to the sovereign will, you have reduced the army, and you are no 
longer to build new ships of war.”—‘‘ My son you understand me very well; 
but I think you wish to drive me to extremities.’—‘‘ God preserve me from so 
doing! Why do you attribute bad intentions to me? The payment of a 
quarter of the revenues to the Sublime Porte is a condition attached to the heredi- 
tary dignity, a point agreed upon by common consent with the High Allied Courts, 
and the will of His Highness is positive in this respect. Therefore it is for your 
own interests and for those of your family that I hold this language. To reject 
this condition, which God forbid, or any one of the other conditions, is to 
give occasion for a fresh effusion of blood, which is a terrible thing. For my 
part, I speak sincerely to your Highness. You will act as you think fit.”— 
‘It is not that I wish to show hesitation or opposition. The High Allied 
Powers, our friends, possess discretion ; they know what justice is; they do not 
employ coercion where it would be unjust to do it. They will understand, 
judging the matter equitably, that when the fourth part of its revenue goes out 
of a country, that country is ruined. This province is a possession of the Sub- 
lime Porte ; whether it be flourishing or ruined, either of these situations nearly 
affects that empire. Finally, this condition is quite above my powers, it is an 
impracticable condition.”—‘* My Lord, up to this moment the Sublime Porte has. 
not granted the hereditary succession to any of its servants. It is, therefore, so to 
say, your Highness’s duty, congratulating yourself thereon, to offer every year, 
as the Sultan requires, the fourth part of the revenues of this country to the Im- 
perial Treasury, as a mark of gratitude for that favour; the Sultan has a 
right to that.”—‘*Both I and the country belong to the Sultan—I refuse 
nothing ; but I see no moderation herein which should induce me to show myself 
disposed to do so. And even supposing I were to obey the sovereign orders, 
the money cannot be paid, and you will say, do you see, Mehemet Ali is again 
placing himself in opposition. In truth, I cannot say, yes; I shall doa thing 
which is out of my power. I make known the real state of the case, and I beg 
to be favoured in this respect on the part of His Highness.”—“ But, my Lord, 
the revenues of the Province of Egypt are known to all the world, and the 
demand of a fourth part of those revenues is a moderate demand. Your High- 
ness will not henceforward have too great expences to incur; but even supposing 


363 


that anything should happen which should require great expences, your High- 
ness can come to an undertanding thereupon with the Sublime Porte.” 

In the three or four interviews which I had with the Pasha, I tried to per- 
suade him that it would be highly expedient that he should take the engage- 
ment in question, because he would thus have rendered service to the Imperial 
treasury, which would have been a subject of content for all the Ministers of 
the Sublime Porte; and I told him many things to the above effect. But far 
from listening to me, he repeated the same objections and insisted on them. I 
said again to him: ‘ My Lord, I have ventured to importune you by telling you 
so many things for your own good and for that of your family ; all this has had 
no result—Well then! let your Highness make known precisely your intentions 
and wishes to the Sublime Porte, and we will see what answer will arrive.’ “I 
am the servant and the slave of the Sultan our master; I will write the plain 
truth, to which I will add my entreaty ; their Excellencies the Ministers of the 
Sublime Porte know what justice is.” 

As after all this anythmg which I might have said would have had no effect, 
I determined to hold my tongue and to break up the interview. 

When we put forward the questions of dress, of the flags of vessels, the 
standards of the troops, and other regulations: ‘‘ But, my friend,”’ said the Pasha, 
“the uniforms of the troops of some Powers differ from each other. There are 
three’sorts of uniform in the Russian troops. What harm isthere in that? Each 
Power has its system and its regulations. This is not the place for discussing 
them.”—*‘ I will only say that since your Highness is one of the most illustrious 
Viziers of the Empire, since Egypt also is a portion of that Empire, and as your 
Highness is well aware it has become the custom, so to say, for the Viziers and 
inhabitants of Turkey to dress like the Ministers and Functionaries at Constan- 
tinople, it is essential that your Highness should adapt every one of your 
systems and of your regulations to those of the Sublime Porte.”—“ It is very 
well, my son; I, for my part, do not oppose myself thereto; I also am 
desirous of adopting the established uniform; but the people here are a little 
more difficult to deal with than those elsewhere. The change of dress is really 
one of those things which ought to be brought about by degrees; trust to me, 
and I will do the needful in due time; that is to say, I will cause every one to 
change his costume. As for the flag of the ships of war, it is exactly the same 
as that of the ships of the Imperial fleet ; only the standards of the troops have 
hitherto been white ; whenever patterns shall be sent from Constantinople, I will 
cause similar ones to be made.” 

I caused the Pasha to take the above engagements. 

The Pasha said to me: ‘‘ According to the same equitable principles upon 
which the new reforms are based, every one here is sure of his property and of 
his life; and all exert their care and attention to act accordingly upon these 
essential points. There is only the assessment of the taxes which cannot be 
adapted in a country like this to the system established by the reforms; because, 
together with the tenths, an annual tax is levied on the inhabitants known by the 
name of “ Hradjiye,” the amount of which in money depends upon the extent of 
Jand which each person possesses. ‘ Hradjiye’’ is properly the rent of those 
lands ; nothing more is taken under the head of taxes. These countries cannot 
in any way be assimilated to the countries of Roumelia. Suppose that it is wished 
to abolish the ancient system in order to substitute a new one in its place; well 
then, in that case, considering the singular character of the Arabs, the ancient 
system would be entirely disorganized, and that in the end would have caused 
disorder. Thus, let the Sublime Porte trust to the view I take for arranging 
such matters.” 

This is what the Pasha finished by saying to me. 

I represented to the Pasha that His Highness wishes the First Regiment of 
the Line of the Imperial Marines, as well as the militia of the province of Broussa 
to be sent back entirely to Constantinople from whatever quarter they may be in. 
‘These regiments had been sent into Syria. Up to this moment no portion of 
these troops is returned hither. It is to be supposed that some men from these 
regiments have become ‘ Cavasses,’ and that the greatest part of the others are 
gone from Beyrout to Constantinople. The Colonel of the militia, Yadighiar 
Hassan Bey, is alone come into Egypt with Ibrahim Pasha. If hereafter any 
soldiers belonging to these regiments should arrive here, I will immediately send 
them to Constantinople in conformity to the sovereign pleasure.” 


dA2 


364 


According to the instructions which I had received, I used all my efforts, as 
God knows, to fulfil my mission conformably to the wishes of the Sublime 
Porte; but the Pasha, putting forward the inconveniences which exist, ac- 
cording to his views, respecting the fourth part of the revenues and the, suc- 
cession in his family, did not acquiesce in these points. It was with great 
difficulty I made him take the engagement to reduce his troops, to build no 
more ships. without having obtained permission to do so, to.com money i the 
manner pointed out, and to do the other things as His Highness wishes. In speak- 
ing of his family Ialso said to him: ‘ Your Highness wishes that the suc- 
cession should, as an established condition, descend in the order of primogeniture; _ 
but there are inconveniences in this. And among others, the former Begler Bey 
of Tripoli in Barbary, Mustapha Pasha, son of Youssouf Pasha, not having been 
capable of governing, the country was a prey to disorders, and another Governor 
was at length named and sent by the Sublime Porte to Tripoli. Now Egypt is 
one of the most important provinces of the Empire. That being the case, and, 
considering that what may happen in the course of time is not known, the Sub- 
lime Porte which thinks of everything, has considered the course which has been 
adopted to be expedient.’”—‘ Effendi, my son, you are right ; but my children 
being men of information, men of sense, such an inconvenience is not to be 
feared.””—“‘ It is true, Highness, that your sons who now exist are sensible and 
judicious men; but in the course of generations, the Government of Egypt may 
devolve upon a man without judgment, and then, which God forbid, the province 
may be expected to be in disorder, disunion to exist in your family, and other. 
evils to arise, which at this moment do not present themselves to the mind. 
History affords us a number of instances of such things having happened for- 
merly. Perhaps your Highness even has been witness to similar events which 
nearly affect the Sublime Porte.”—‘“ This country belongs to the Sublime Porte. 
If the government of this country should fall into the hands of an incapable per-. 
son, the Sublime Porte would know it, it would be informed thereof even from 
hence; and as it will not leave the country in disorder, there will be no kind of. 
difficulty in its conferring the government of the province upon a worthy subject, 
and it has the right to do so.” 

This is what the Pasha ended by saying, in consequence of which I drew up, 
and divided into paragraphs the present report, which contains only a third part | 
of my discussions with Mehemet Ali; I send it, together with a letter from his 
Highness to his Highness the Grand Vizier, and JI shall await at Alexandria the 
reply of the Sublime Porte. ; | | 


No. 217. 


Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, . : Foreign Office, April 10, 1841. 

I HAVE received your Excellency’s despatch of the 17th of 
March, inclosing copy of an Official Note addressed to you by Rechid 
Pasha, on the previous day, requesting to be made acquainted with’ your 
Excellency’s opinion as to the course to be pursued by the Porte, with 
reference to the answer given by Mehemet Ali to the Grand Vizier, 
respecting the firmans of the 13th of February, and -contaiming an 
noon of a discussion between your colleagues and yourself upon that 
subject. 

I have to state to your Excellency in reply, that my former 
despatches and the Collective Notes of the Conference appear to me to 
afford sufficient elements to guide your Excellency in the advice which, 
either jointly with your Colleagues, or separately, if they should not be 
prepared to take any steps in the matter, your Excellency should give to 
the Porte. It is extremely important that the matters in dispute between 
the Sultan and Mehemet Ali should be settled as soon as possible ; and 
it is the opinion of Her Majesty’s Government that the objection stated by 
your Excellency in your despatch of the 17th ultimo, to any communication 
being made by the Sultan to Mehemet Ali, because such communication 
would have the appearance of negotiation, ought not to weigh against 


365. 


the extreme urgency of coming to a final settlement ; and it is obvious, 
that no such final settlement can be come to without such, direct commu- 
nication. 

_ On some of the points of difference between the two parties, Mehemet 
Ali_ has reason on his side; on others Mehemet Ali is clearly and 
decidedly in the wrong. The Sultan ought, therefore, without delay to 
modify such parts of his firmans as are open to reasonable objections, and 
he should explain why the other parts cannot be altered without a depar- 
ture from the terms of the Treaty of July, and from the opinions and 
advice of the Four Powers: and your Excellency should urge the Porte to 
do this without loss of time. | : 

_ It is very possible that the report announced by the Internuncio to 
his colleagues, that the Conference had separated, and that the Alliance 
was dissolved, may have encouraged Mehemet Ali to make the unreason- 
able objections contained in his letter to the Grand Vizier, of which a 
copy was inclosed in your despatch of the 9th of March; but Mehemet 
_ Ali will since that time have learnt, that the Conference has not 

separated, and that the Alliance has not been dissolved: but that, on the 
contrary, the Four Powers remain steady to their purpose, and true to 
their engagements ; and he will, therefore, probably be disposed again to 
revert to that state of submission to the Sultan, which he had at first 
professed, and of which he had given proof by the surrender of the 
Turkish fleet; but. from which he was probably induced afterwards to 
swerve by the report, no doubt sent to him from Paris, that the Con- 
ference was about to separate. 

A proposal to that effect was indeed made, and. strongly urged by 
the Plenipotentiaries of Austria and Prussia at London, by orders of 
their Governments, and apparently in compliance with wishes expressed 
to those Governments by the Government of France, with a view to 


render it more easy for the French Government to enter into a fresh_ 


Convention with the Four Powers and with Turkey. But this proposal 
was positively and firmly rejected by Her Majesty’s Government, on 
account of the very objection which subsequent events have shown to be 
well-founded; namely, that differences were likely to arise between 
Mehemet Ali and the Sultan as to the practical acceptance, by the 
former, of the conditions which the Four Powers had recommended the 
Sultan to attach to the grant of hereditary tenure; and that if Mehemet 
Ali were to find that the Four Powers had abandoned the Sultan at the 
eleventh hour, and before they had seen him fully through the difficulties 
out of which they had engaged themselves by Treaty to help him, 
Mehemet Ali would thereby be encouraged to retract his submission, and 
to start objections to those conditions; relying upon the infirmity of 
purpose which would thus have been shown by the Four Powers; and 
believing, as in such case he would justly have been entitled to do, that 
the Four Powers, after having expelled his troops from Syria, notwith- 
standing the displeasure of France, had at last shrunk from further 
encountering that displeasure, and had, in deference to the will of France, 
abandoned the enforcement of the conditions which they had themselves 
inserted in the Treaty, and which in their subsequent Notes they had 
declared to be indispensable. 
Iam, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON 


366 


No. 218. 


Sir John Barrow to J. Backhouse, Esq. 


Sir, Admiralty, April 14, 1841. 

I AM commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to 
transmit to you, for the information of Viscount Palmerston, the inclosed 
copy of a letter from Admiral the Honourable Sir Robert Stopford, dated 
30th March, 1841, inclosing copy of a statement from Lieutenant-General 
Jochmus respecting the strength of the Egyptian forces on leaving 
Damascus on the 29th of December last. 

I have, &c., 


(Signed) JOHN BARROW. 


Inclosure in No. 218. 
Admiral Stopford to R. More O’Ferrall, Esq. 


. «« Princess Charlotte,” 
Sir, Malta, March 30, 1841. 


IL INCLOSE the copy of a statement by Lieutenant-General Jochmus 
from the returns of Mr. Werry, the British Consul at Damascus, of 
the strength of the Egyptian forces on leaving that place on the 29th 
of December last, appearing to be 54,713 men. The discrepancy in the 
various accounts is said by General Jochmus to arise from trains of 
attendants, mule-drivers, &c., who are all armed after the Eastern 
custom, being reckoned in one estimate and not another, and may amount | 
to 8,000 men; but it is difficult to get at the exact truth in respect to 
numbers. ; 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) ROBERT STOPFORD, 
Admiral. 


_ 367 


Sub-Inclosure 1 in No. 218. 


\ 


General Return of the Egyptian Forces beginning the retreat from Damascus on 
the 29th December, 1840. 


Damascus, February 27, 1841. 


Effective Combatants. 


Total Non-combatant} Grand | Muleteers, Ca- 


PERIODS. Regular Army. Irregular Forces. Military Admi- mel-Drivers Total of 
migration Total of ra Employés : anal 
; , Effective of Syria, their ndividuals 
en nye Infantry | Cavalry. | Infantry. | Cavalry. Military Ser- Berrantaall leaving 
ide General Return, cand vants. armedand hence] Damascus at § 
Poatah Artillery. | Lances Rank Lances Comba- included in | the retreat on 
ated a Fee bay Ei ae i ae Invalids and the Irregular | 29th December 
5 an Se : i i 
Jaffa, February 2, 1841. | Rank and Hospitals, wena ra 
File. Sabres. File. Sabres. 


September 10, 1840. | 


Forces in Syria under | 
Ibrahim Pasha,.....} 58,000 7,000 | 5,000 | 5,000 | 75,000 10,000 


Loss of troops up to 
the beginning of the |° 
Retreat.........+--} 34,000 | 2,000 | 3,000} 1,000 | 40,000 5,000 


ee | | | | | | —-——__ 


Forces retreating from 
Damascus ........| 24,000 5,000 2,000 4,000 | 35,000 5,000 


8,000* 48,000 
Same Forces accord- Pee ed 4,138 

ing to Mr. Werry’s : Albanian.| +°” not including +6,160 
Return made at Da- Artill i 2,000 | ©. | military ser- 4 
MASCUS 6600 eeeeee ere ge vants 

§ 4,832 1,500 ; 

34,214 | 4,201 | 2,000 | 4,000 | 44,415 4,138 6,160 q 54,713 

* OK 


* Vide General Return of February 2, 1841, where these classes are estimated at 8,000 men, who although 
armed, and on foot or horseback, do not constitute any irregular effective force. Mr. Werry has included them in the 
regular troops, under the denomination of Bachi-Bozuk horse and Arnaouts. 
According to the same principle the number of women and children is about 8,000. 
Mr. Werry makes it,—Wives of Non-commissioned Officers with children . 5,786 
Add Wives and Female Attendants in Harems of the 
General and Field Officers . 5 * 3 1,600 


7,386 


+ The difference of 1,840 men must be deducted from the amount of Mr. Werry’s Regular Infantry, as many 
former soldiers were employed as muleteers and camel-drivers, the animals not having been hired, but driven away from 
the neighbouring devastated villages, from whence the peasantry had fled. 

+ The effective number of Hennedy Irregular Horse was not above 2,000. 

§ Upwards of one half of these 4,832 men were lately drafted Infantry soldiers, the old Artillery having deserted 
in large proportions. 

|| Seven hundred dismounted Cavalry arrived at Gaza; it is very likely that a similar number of dismounted men 
left Damascus, where barley had been extremely scarce. Hence, also, a great number of guns were drawn by bullocks 
and cows. 

Difference of Rations issued 6,713. 

This difference of 6,713 men will not appear extraordinary, if it is considered that Mr. Werry’s return is made 
up from the ration return, pay lists, and other similar documents of the last days of December found in Damascus. 
The already then only half-organized infantry and artillery, naturally overdrew rations and such small portions of pay 
as was issued. 

** Distribution of Irregular forces :— 
Total of Mr. Werry’s . : c ‘ - 11,640 
Riflemen C A * . : ° ‘ 520 


eee 


‘12,160 
Returned above:— 
Albanians : . ° 2 : ° 4 2,000 
Hennedy and Bachi-Bozuk Cavalry “ 5 : : 4,000 
Armed men on horse and foot accompanying the army and harems in 
note *, not actual soldiers . . : : 6,160 


12,160 


(Signed) J. F. HERMAN, 
Assistant Adjutant- General. 
Approved (Signed) A. JOCHMUS, 


Lieutenant-General. 


368 


Sub-Inclosure 2 in No. 218. 


Note en Arabe sur la Force de l' Armée d’Ibrahim Pacha, et des Personnes qu s’y 
trouvaient attachés lors de l’ Evacuation du Rymas, le 29 Décembre, 1840. 


(Traduction.) 
Nombre des Pachas. 
Ibrahim Pacha, Général-en-Chef - - ] 
Solyman Pacha, Chef de I’ Tia Mayor, MagOr 
Général de sy Armée - 1 
Ahmed Pacha, Emir Miran - - - ipa 
Osman Pacha, Ditto - z - 1 
Ahmed Pacha, Emir Miran de Cuirassiers 1 
Sélim. Pacha, Emir Miran - - - Pee 
Kourchid Pacha, Ditto’ - - - 1 
Houssein Pacha, Ditto - - - ] 
Chérif Pacha, Ditto - - - | Sue 
—_—— 9 
Infanterie. 
Généraux -~— - - = - - - 4 
Colonels - - - - - - li 
Lieutenant-Colonels - - - - - fo" 
Chefs de Bataillon - - - - 60 
Adjutants-Major - - - - - 68 - 
-Capitaines” - - - - - - 438 
Lieutenants et Sous-Lieutenants - - 823 
Attachés aux Régimens (Médecins, Phar- 
maciens, et Musiques) - — - - 273 
Sous-Officers et Soldats . - - - 27,956 
29,646 
Infanterie Legere. 
Chasseurs Tirailleurs . - - - - 520 
Cavalerie. 
Généraux. - - ‘ lb = “ i 3 
Colonels - = : - d “= 6 
Lieutenant-Colonels. - - - - - 3 
Chefs d’Escadron - - 3 : 16 
Adjutants-Major - - - 3 . 34 
Capitaines - - - - - - 93 
Lieutenants et Sous-Lieutenants - - 171 
Attachés aux Régimens (Médecins, Phar- 
maciens, et Musiques) - - = 176 
Sous-Officiers et Cav allen: - - - 3,699 
4,201 
| Artillerie. 
Généraux - - . . 2 b 2) 
Colonels - ‘ : 3 . Sh oG 
Lieutenant-Colonels_ - - = : 2 3 
Chefs de Bataillon - P ; 10 
Adjutants-Major - - - - - 21 
Capitaines = - - - - - 73 
Lieutenants et SousshiidniPhants . os 92 


Carried forward - - “ 204 234,376 


Brought forward - - 204 34,376 
Attachés aux Régimens (Médecins, Phar- 
maciens, et Musiques) - - - 190 
Sous-Officiers et Artilleurs — - - - 4,628 
5,022 
Soldats Irréguliers. 
Bachi Bozuk Cavalerie - - - . 4,000 
Hanadi - Ditto - - - - 2,500 
Cavas - - Ditto - - - - 250 
Arnaout Infanterie — - - ~ in 4,860 
. 11,610 
Invalides. 
De toutes Armes - - - - - 3,673 
Total de Armée en Hommes’ - - “ 54,681 


Femmes et Enfans de l Armée excepté les Femmes des Chefs. 


Femmes - - ayer - - - 3,697 
Enfans sevrés - - - - L752 
Ditto laitant- - - .- - 33767089 
| 5,786 
Grand Total de Evacuation - < 60,467 


-(Translation.) 
Note in Arabic of the Force of the Army of Ibrahim Pasha, and of the 
Persons who were attached to it at time of the evacuation of Damas- 
cus, December 29, 1840. 


Number of Pashas. 


Ibrahim Pasha, Commander-in-Chief - 1 
Solyman Pasha, Chief of the met Maloy 

Major- -General ofthe Army - - J 
Ahmed Pasha, Emir Miran - pik % 1 
Osman Pasha, Ditto - - kee 1 
Ahmed Pasha, Emir Miran of the Cuirassiers 1 
Selim Pasha, Emir Miran - - - 1 
Kourchid Pasha, Ditto - - = oe 
Houssein Pasha, Ditto - - - 1 
Cherif Pasha, Ditto - - - - 1 

— 9 
Infantry 

Generals hog - - = - - 4 
Colonels - - - - - - 11 
Lieutenant-Colonels - 5 a z 13 
Chefs de Bataillon . és - 5 60 
Adjutants-Major—- - - “ - 68 
Captains - - - - - - 438 
Lieutenants and Sub-Lieutenants - - 823 
Attached to the Regiments Riactors, ApoE 

thecaries and Musicians 273 
Non-Commissioned Officers and Soldiers 27,956 


——ierr= .. 29,646 
3B 


370 


Light Infantry. herd 
Rifemen@ete = 3 STE 520 
Cavalry. - 
Generals - TE Le A 
Colonels - - - - Aisha 6 
Lieutenant-Colonels Se OE how a 
Chefs d’Escadron - - - - - 16 — 
Adjutants-Major Fe oF tel ta ia ne 34 
Captains - - - - - - 93 
Lieutenants and Sub-Lieutenants  - - 171 
Attached to the Regiments (Doctors, ee | 
thecaries, and Musicians) - 176 
Non-Commissioned Officers and Troopers - 3,699 , 
——-— 4,201 
Artillery. 
Generals = > a ay - 7 2 
Colonels - - - - - . - 3 
Lieutenant-Colonels = - - - 3 
Chefs d’Bataillon - - - - - Se 
Adjutants-Major - - ennipie ie hehe ei! 
Captains - - - - - - - 7 
Lieutenants and Sub-Lieutenants - - 92 
Attached to the Regiments RDoctors, Apo- 
thecaries, and Musicians se, iilire 190 
Non-Commissioned Officers and Arillerymen 4,628 
2 OUR. k 
Irregular Soldiers. 
Bachi Bozuk Cavalry - - - 4,000 
Hanadi - _ Ditto - - 2,500 
Cavas - Ditto - - - 250 
Arnaout Infantry - - : - 4,860 
11,610 
Invalids. 
Of all the Army - “ - - - - 3,673 
Total of the Army in Men _-_ - - 54,681 


Women and Children of the Army except the Women of the Chiefs. 


Women - - - - - - 3,697 
Weaned children - - - 41,752 2.089 
Childred not weaned - - - 5376 z 
5,786 
Grand Total of the Evacuation - - - 60,467 


371 


No. 219. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received April 17.) 


My Lord, Therapia, March 27, 1841. 

YOUR Lordship has received copy of Mehemet Ali’s letter to the 
Grand Vizier, and been informed of the conduct I thought it my duty to 
adopt. Ihave now the honour to inclose copy of my reply to the Official 
Note I received from the Porte, which was transmitted to your Lordship 
in my despatch of the 17th instant. 

Each of my Colleagues received a Note, identic with that to me, 
from the Porte, and they have been so good as to send me copies of their 
answers, which I inclose. They desired to have a copy of my reply, 
which was sent to them. 

Your Lordship will see that I have strictly adhered to the spirit of 
your Instructions, and to the provisions of the Convention of 15th July, 
and the letter dated the 30th January from the Conference at London to 
Chekib Effendi. 

Rechid Pasha has informed me, that the Council has decided that 
instructions shall be sent to Chekib Effendi to consult the British Govern- 
ment respecting the actual situation of the Egyptian Question, to the 
end that the Porte may act according to the advice of that Government. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 219. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Rechid Pasha. 


Monsieur le Ministre, Therapia, March 18, 1841. 


I HAVE had the honour to receive your Excellency’s Note dated 
16th of March, wherein reference is made to a letter received by the 
Sublime Porte from the Pasha of Egypt, and to a despatch written by 
his Excellency Said Muhib Effendi, copies of which have been commu- 
nicated to me by order of the Sublime Porte. 

Your Excellency says that the hesitation of Mehemet Ali to accept 
the conditions referred to in the above-mentioned papers, is in no wise 
compatible with the position of a subject, and that it is clear that it 
would be hurtful, and contrary to the sovereign right of the Sultan, to 
grant the demands. of the Pasha; and your Excellency has been ordered. 
by His Imperial Majesty the Sultan to ask me, what is my opinion as to 
the conduct the Sublime Porte should hold. 

I beg to assure your Excellency that [ am highly flattered by this 
mark of the confidence of the Sublime Porte, and that I will now, and 
upon all occasions, endeavour to merit it by sincerity. 

My opinion coincides entirely with the opinion expressed by your 
Excellency; I think that submission on the part of Mehemet Ali to the 
authority of his Sovereign, His Imperial Majesty the Sultan, was and is 
the basis upon which the favours granted by the Sultan are all to rest, as 
the fundamental condition of their being accorded. It appears to me 
that the letter from the Pasha of Egypt to the Grand Vizier, does not 
bear the character of submission, though it contains certain phrases 
expressive of solicitation, in the same style as that which the Pasha has 
heretofore used in his letters written at the moment when he was openly 
in arms against his Sovereign; and the essence of this letter seems to be, 
refusal of the conditions imposed on him by the Sultan. I will not quote 
the various official documents, including the reply of the Conference of 
London to his Excellency Chekib Effendi, dated 30th ot January, 1841, 
wherein the submission of Mehemet Ali has been recognized by all the 
Allies, as the foundation upon asa to rest the clemency and the 

3° > 


372 : 


favours His Imperial Majesty may be pleased to extend to that Pasha 
nor do I think it necessary here to cite the instructions I have received 
from my Government.on that point, because they have already been made 
fully known to the Sublime Porte; but I refer to those documents as the 
guides by which I am directed, and the authority by which I am 
governed. oh 

~ Tf submission be the basis, as above said, I am of opinion that it is 
at least very questionable, if it be possible, in the present case, for the 
Sublime Porte to negotiate with Mehemet Ali without infringing on the 
principle of Sovereignty in the Sultan. The firman is an order. No 
subject can refuse to obey an order, and be said to be submissive to the 
Sovereign. A subject may petition his Sovereign to change or to revoke 
an order. Has Mehemet Ali petitioned for alteration, or has he expressed 
his will to disobey the order? The latter seems to be the fact; and what 
we learn of the continued preparations making by the Pasha to 
strengthen his military means, corroborates the notion that he refuses to 
obey. 

The Sublime Porte being intimately connected by the strongest ties 
with the Government I have the honour to serve, I think it my duty to 
recommend, that in a matter of so much importance as that at present 
in question, and respecting which there may be doubts, the Sublime 
Porte should ask the opinion of its faithful friend and Ally; and that the 
Sublime Porte should remain entirely inactive as respects the Pasha of 
Egypt’s letter to the Grand Vizier, until the Sublime Porte shall have had 
confidential communication with the British Government. 

I venture to offer this opinion in conformity with the expressed 
desire of the Sublime Porte that I should state an opinion, and because 
I cannot foresee that the mode of acting I recommend can be productive 
of the least inconvenience to the Sublime Porte. It appears to me that 
no evil of any sort for the Sublime Porte can attend upon delay. The 
Sublime Porte must naturally increase its internal strength during the 
period of delay. The Sublime Porte is, at this moment, stronger, I 
believe, than Mehemet Ali. I think he will not risk any offensive act, 
and that if he were to risk any such act his destruction might be the 
consequence. 

The Porte is pleased to attach high value to its friendly relations 
with its Allies, and they can only be fortified by every additional evi- 
dence of the confidence which the Sublime Porte reposes in them. The 
Sublime Porte will not limit its power of free and independent action by 
asking the opinion of a friend, but it will obtain the sure knowledge of 
the feelings of that friend, and the advantage such knowledge will afford 
for the subsequent arrangement of its own plans. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 219. 
Baron de Sttirmer to Rechid Pasha. 


Constantinople, 18 Mars, 1841. 


: J’AT recu hier la note que votre Excellence m’a fait V’honneur de 
madresser, par ordre de Sa Majesté Impériale le Sultan, pour me 
demander mon avis sur la ligne de conduite que la Sublime Porte devra 
suivre en conséquence du refus du Pacha d’Egypte dese soumettre 4 quel- 
ques unes des conditions qui lui ont été imposées. 

Tout en appréciant, comme je le dois, une si flatteuse preuve de con- 
fiance, ou plutot par cela méme que j’en sens toute la valeur, je ne saurais 
prendre sur moi d’y répondre en mon propre nom, et dés hier jai transmis 
cette note 4 mon auguste Cour, en la priant de me prescrire les conseils | 
que je devrais donner 4 la Sublime Porte dans cette conjoncture délicate. 

Si toutefois, sans préjuger en rien ses intentions, j’osais en attendant 
me permettre d’énoncer ici quelques idées qui me sont personnelles, je 


373 


dirai que parmi les Actes de la Conférence de Londres; qui nous ont servi 
de guide jusqu’ici, il en est un (la note A Chékib Effendi du 30 Janvier) 
qui nous fait connaitre la mani¢re dans laquelle les Puissances Alliées de 
la Sublime Porte auraient désiré voir établir ’hérédité que le Sultan a 
daigné accorder 4 Méhémet Ali. Arrivé ici tardivement, c’est-a-dire long- 
tems aprés l’expédition du firman d’investiture, cet Acte n’a pu avoir son 
effet. Néanmoins, il pourrait, ce me semble, déterminer la Sublime Porte, 
méme encore maintenant, non pas a changer ses premiéres résolutions, ce 
qui serait contraire 4 sa dignité, mais 4 chercher quelque moyen d’accéder 
aux priéres de Méhémet Ali, en satisfaisant, en méme tems, au voeu des 
Puissances Alliées, qui n’est autre que de régler, dans l’intérét du maintien 
de la paix Européenne, le mode de succession en Egypte, de maniére 4 
écarter pour l’avenir tout sujet de contestation. 

Pour ce qui est des autres conditions dont Méhémet Ali réclame la 
modification, elles ont été, et doivent étre, Vexpression pure et simple de la 
volonté Souveraine du Sultan; et les Alliés de Sa Majesté Impériale pen- 
seront sans doute qu’a elle seule appartient le droit de décider jusqu’a 
quel point elle peut y condescendre. 

Veuillez agréer, &c., 
(Signé) STURMER. 


(Translation.) 


Constantinople, March 18, 1841. 

I RECEIVED yesterday the Note which your Excellency did me the 
honour to address to me, by order of His Imperial Majesty the Sultan, in 
order to ask my opinion as to the line of conduct which the Sublime 
Porte ought to follow in consequence of the refusal of the Pasha of Egypt. 
to submit to some of the conditions which have been imposed upon him. 

At the same time that I appreciate as I ought to do, so flattering a 
proof of confidence, or rather for the very reason that I am sensible of 
all its value, I could not take upon myself to reply to it inmy own name, 
and even yesterday I transmitted that note to my August Court, request- 
ing it to prescribe to me the advice which I ought to give the Sublime 
Porte in this delicate conjuncture of affairs. 

If, however, without in any way prejudging its intentions, I might 
venture in the meanwhile to allow myself to express at present some 
notions which are personal to myself, I would say that among the Acts of 
the Conference of London, which have hitherto guided us, there is one 
(the Note to Chekib Effendi of the 30th of January) which acquaints us 
with the manner in which the Powers, Allies of the Sublime Porte, would 
have wished to see the hereditary succession which the Sultan has been 
pleased to grant to Mehemet Ali, settled. That Act, which arrived here at 
a late period, that is to say, long after the despatch of the Firman of in- 
vestiture, could not take effect. Nevertheless it might, as it appears to 
me, determine the Sublime Porte, even still at the present moment, not to 
change its first resolutions, which would be contrary to its dignity, but to 
seek some means of acceding to the entreaties of Mehemet Ali, at the same 
time that it complied with the wish of the Allied Powers, which is no 
other than to settle, with a view to the maintenance of the peace of 
Kurope, the mode of succession in Egypt, in such a manner as to obviate 
for the future all matter of dispute. 

With regard to the other conditions which Mehemet Ali requests 
may be modified, they have been, and ought to be, the pure and simple 
expression of the Sovereign will of the Sultan; and the Allies of His 
Imperial Majesty will doubtless be of opinion that to him alone belongs 

the right of deciding to what extent he can comply. 
: ! Be pleased to receive, &c., 
(Signed) STURMER. 


374 


Inclosure 3 in No. 219. 


Count Kénigsmarck to Rechid Pasha. 


Buyukdéré, ce 17 Mars, 1841. 


LE Soussigné, Ministre de Prusse prés la Sublime Porte Ottomane, a 
eu l’honneur de recevoir la Note que son Excellence M. le Ministre des 
Affaires Etrangéres a bien voulu lui adresser en date du 14 de ce mois 
(21 Moharrem), pour demander, d’ordre de Sa Majesté le Sultan, son avis 
sur le partia prendre par la Sublime Porte, en conséquence des représen- 
tations de Méhémet Ali Pacha, relativement 4 plusieurs des dispositions 
Souveraines contenues dans le firman d’investiture héréditaire du Gou- 
vernement de l’Egypte. 

Plus le Soussigné se trouve honoré de cette marque de confiance, plus 
il regrette de n’étre pas autorisé a offrir 4 ce sujet des conseils. Il va 
s’empresser de porter la susdite Note 4 la connaissance de son auguste 
Cour, et d’en demander les instructions. . 

Le Soussigné, &c., 


(Signé) KCENIGSMARCK, 


- (Translation.) 


Buyukdéré, March 17, 1841. 


THE Undersigned, Minister of Prussia at the Sublime Ottoman Porte, 
has had the honour to receive the Note which his Excellency the Minister for 
Foreign Affairs had the goodness to address to him on the 14th of this 
month (21 Moharrem) to ask, by order of His Majesty the Sultan, his 
opinion as to the course to be taken by the Sublime Porte, in consequence 
of the representations of Mehemet Ali Pasha, relative to many of the 
sovereign dispositions contained in the firman of hereditary investiture of 
the Government of Egypt. 

The more the Undersigned feels honoured by this mark of confidence, 
the more does he regret that he is not authorized to offer advice on this 
subject. He will hasten to bring the above-mentioned Note to the know- 
ledge of his august Court, and to ask instructions from it. 

The Undersigned, &c., 

(Signed) KGENIGSMARCK. 


Inclosure 4 in No. 219. 


M. Titow to Rechid Pasha. 


ys Mars, 1841. 

J’AI eu Phonneur de recevoir la Note Officielle que votre Excellence 
m’a adressée le 21 Moharrem (,3; Février), pour m’inviter 4 énoncer un 
avis sur la ligne de conduite a tenir par la Sublime Porte, vu Vhésitation 
du Pacha d’Egypte 4 remplir quelques unes des conditions tracées dans 
le firman que Said Muhib Effendi s’est trouvé chargé de lui remettre. 

Le désir spontané que votre Excellence m’exprime au nom de Sa 
Hautesse ne saurait étre A mes yeux qu’un nouvel et précieux témoignage 
de la sincére union de nos deux augustes Souverains, et de la confiance 
que le Sultan met a juste titre dans les dispositions et les conseils des 
Cours signataires de alliance du 15 Juillet, 1840. 

L’objet de cette alliance conservatrice a été de maintenir, sous les 
auspices de Sa Hautesse, Pintégrité de Ja Turquie, en ramenant la paix 
dans l’Orient. Afin d’accélérer cet heureux résultat, le Cabinet Impérial 
s'est joint au Gouvernement Britannique et aux autres Cours Alliées pour 
offrir 4 la Sublime Porte les conseils exposés dans les instructions 4 M. 
Ambassadeur d’Angleterre du 15 Octobre et dans le Mémorandum signé 
a Londres le 14 Novembre. 


375 


Ces conseils, dont j’ai été appelé a m’acquitter ici, de concert avec 
mes Collégues, et que les Représentans Alliés 4 Londres ont encore mieux 
développés dans la Note Collective du 30 Janvier dernier A Chékib Effendi, 
portaient entr’autres, qu’en accordant 4 Méhémet Ali l’investiture hérédi- 
taire du Pachalic d’Egypte, la Sublime Porte ferait bien de lui tracer les 
conditions restrictives établies par la Convention du 15 Juillet. 

Le dispositif et les détails des conditions a prescrire sur une pareille 
base au Pacha d’Egypte appartenaient de leur nature au domaine exclusif 
et intérieur de la Sublime Porte. Les explications qui en résultent, et les 
questions administratives qui s’y rattachent, me sembleraient donc, je 
Vavoue, trop délicates en elles-mémes pour admettre, sans autorisation 
expresse, ma co-opération dans une matiére qui, entre les données locales 
qu’exigerait son examen approfondi, touche de si prés a l’exercice de ce 
pouvoir Souverain et indépendant que les augustes amis de Sa Hautesse 
sont toujours les premiers 4 reconnaitre et a respecter. 

Je craindrais ainsi, M. le Ministre, d’outrepasser les attributions qui 
me sont assignées comme organe diplomatique de Sa Majesté l’Empereur, 
Si je prenais sur moi de répondre a Vappel, d’ailleurs si amical, de la 
Sublime Porte, autrement qu’en assurant votre Excellence de l’empresse- 
ment que je mettrai a en référer 4 ma Cour et a demander ses ordres. 

Veuillez donc, M. le Ministre, croire au zéle que j’apporterai a m’ac- 
quitter sans délai de ce devoir, et agréez, en méme tems, l’assurance de ma 
haute considération. | 

Je saisis, &c., 
(Signé) TITOW. 


(Translation.) 


March %, 1841. 

I HAVE had the honour to receive the official note which your Excel- 
Jency addressed to me on the 21st of Moharrem (8, February), to request 
me to express an opinion on the line of conduct to be observed by the 
Porte, with reference to the hesitation of the Pasha of Egypt to fulfil 
some of the conditions laid down in the firman which Said Muhib Effendi 
was commissioned to deliver to him. 

The spontaneous desire which your Excellency expresses to me in the 
name of His Highness, cannot but be in my estimation, a fresh and pre- 
cious evidence of the sincere union of our two august Sovereigns, and of 
the confidence which the Sultan places in the dispositions and the advice 
of the Courts, parties to the alliance of the 15th of July, 1840. 

The object of this conservative alliance has been to maintain under 
the auspices of His Highness, the integrity of Turkey, by re-establishing 
peace in the East. In order to accelerate this happy result, the Imperial 
Cabinet, united with the British Government and the other Allied Courts, 
to offer to the Sublime Porte the advice set forth in the instructions to 
the Ambassador of England of the 15th of October, and in the Memoran- 
dum signed at London on the 14th of November. , 

This advice, which [ have been called upon here to offer, in concert 
with my colleagues, and which the Allied Representatives in London have 
still better explained in the Collective Note to Chekib Effendi of the 30th 
of January last, purported, among other matters, that, in granting to 
Mehemet Ali the hereditary investiture of the Pashalic of Egypt, the 
Sublime Porte would do well to impose upon him the restrictions estab- 
lished by the Convention of the 15th of July. 

The enactment and the details of the conditions to be prescribed on 
such a basis to the Pasha, appertained from their nature to the exclusive 
and internal jurisdiction of the Sublime Porte. The explanations result- 
ing therefrom, and the questions of administration which attach thereto, 
would then, I confess, appear to me, too delicate in themselves, to admit of 
my co-operation without express authority, in a matter which, among the 
local data which its thorough investigation would require, bears so di- 
rectly upon that sovereign and independent power which the august Allies 
of His Highness have always been the first to recognize and to respect. 


376 


Thus, Sir, I should fear to exceed the attributes which are so assigned 
to me as the diplomatic agent of His Majesty the Emperor, if I took upon 
myself to respond to the very friendly appeal of the Sublime Porte, other- 
wise than by assuring your Excellency of the alacrity with which I shall 
refer the matter to my Court and request its instructions. 

Be pleased then, Sir, to believe in the zeal with which I shall execute 
that duty without delay, and accept at the same time the assurance of my 
high consideration. 

| I avail myself, &c., 
(Signed) TITOW. 


No. 220. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received April 17.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, March 27, 1841. 


I FORWARD extract from a letter communicated to me by Baron de 
Stiirmer ; the contents I believe to be a true statement of facts, for they 
correspond with what I have heard from other sources. _ 

lf anything were wanting to show the resistance of Mehemet Ali to 
the orders of the Sultan, and his defiance of the opinion of the Allies, there 
would be enough found in this extract to satisfy everybody on that point, 
and in the other undeniable accounts of his warlike preparations, notwith- 
sien his promises of submission to the authority of the Sublime 

orte. 


Inclosure in No. 220. 
Extraits des Lettres d Egypte parvenues a M. Laurin. 


DES lettres particuliéres d’Alexandrie du 16, et du Caire du 14 Mars, 
portent que Méhémet Ali Pacha réunissait journellement les différens 
Divans dela Capitale, qui s’occupaient exclusivement de lorganisation des 
Colonies Militaires, et d’une Armée Mobile. I] doit avoir donné les. 
ordres nécessaires pour remonter le matériel, tout-a-fait dégradé, que les 
troupes retournées de la Syrie ont ramené. Ibrahim Pacha s’étant chargé 
de l’exécution de ses ordres, Méhémet Ali quitta le Caire le 13 4 midi, et 
arriva 4 Alexandrie le 15 a 9 heures du matin. 

L’armée de Syrie arrive au Caire, petit 4 petit, par le Désert de Suez, 
par celui d’El-Arish, et par la voie de mer par Damiette. Ibrahim Pacha 
prétend, qu’au bout de trois mois tous ces débris seront réorganisés, et 
que bientét il pourra présenter aux ennemis de son pére une armée de 
60,000 hommes. 

Les nouvelles que Méhémet Ali a recues par le bateau a vapeur 

arrivé de France le 14, ne lont pas satisfait. En outre, le Gérant aa 
Consulat de France, M. le Comte de Chabot, arrivé le 15 par un bateau & 
vapeur du Gouvernement Frangais, doit lavoir assuré que la France 
admettra comme un fait accomph, et tout-d-fait ¢tranger a sa_ politique, 
Yarrangement quwil a fait avec la Porte, au sujet de l’administration 
héréditaire du Pachalic d’Egypte. : 
Ibrahim Pacha est toujours souffrant. Il ne peut supporter la 
moindre fatigue. Son pére, voulant le ménager, s’était rendu auprés de 
lui pour traiter des affaires ayant trait 4 organisation et 4 l’administra- 
tion de l’armée, dont il vient d’étre chargé. Son médecin prétend que la 
maladie de foie, dont il est atteint, devra finir par une hydropisie, dont 
les symptémes se sont déja manifestés. ; 

Méhémet Ali doit avoir déclaré au Caire, que si l’on voudra s’enten- 
dre avec lui sur le mode de succession, il sera prét a prelever le quart 
sur les impéts au bénéfice du Sultan, mais qu’il ne voudrait avoir ni con- 


trdle, ni contréleur, soit pour la perception des impéts, soit pour les 
dépenses. ! 


377 


ope reste, Méhémet Ali continuant les armemens, et: forcant les con- 
tribuables 4 payer les impéts par anticipation, le mécontentement est 
toujours le méme; le commerce craint de nouvelles entraves; et les 
proprictaires ne savent 4 quoi s’en tenir & l’égard des monopoles que 
le nouveau Traité de Commerce abolit, et que Méhémet Ali fait mine 
de vouloir maintenir comme par le passé. : 


(Translation.) 


PRIVATE letters from Alexandria of the 6th and from Cairo of the 
14th of March, state that Mehemet Ali Pasha was every day convening 
the different divans of the capital, who were occupied exclusively with the 
organization of the military colonies, and of amoveable army. He is said 
to have given the necessary orders for re-equipping the field-equipage, 
altogether disorganized, which the troops, returned from Syria, have 
brought back with them. 

{brahim Pasha having undertaken to execute his orders, Mehemet 
Ali left Cairo on the 13th at noon, and arrived at Alexandria on the 15th, 
at 9 in the morning. 

The army of Syria arrives at Cairo in small detachments, by the 
Desert of Suez, by that of El-Arish, and by sea through Damietta.. [bra- 
him Pasha gives out that at the end of three months all these remains 
will be reorganized, and that he will soon be able to oppose to the enemies 
of his father an army of 60,000 men. 

The news which Mehemet Ali received by the steam-vessel which 
arrived on the 14th from France, have not satisfied him. Moreover, the 
Count de Chabot, entrusted with the business of the French Consulate, 
who arrived here on the 15th in a French Government steam-vessel, has, 
it is stated, confidentially assured him that France will admit as a settled 
matter, and as altogether alien from her policy, the arrangement which he 
has made with the Porte on the subject of the hereditary administration 
of the Pashalic of Egypt. 

Ibrahim Pasha continues unwell. He cannot undergo the slightest 
fatigue. His father, in order to spare him, went to him to discuss the 
matters relating to the organization and administration of the army which 
is entrusted to him. His physician gives out that the complaint in the 
liver by which he is affected must end in dropsy, the symptoms of which 
have already shown themselves. 

‘Mehemet Ali is said to have declared at Cairo, that if there shall be 
a disposition to come to an understanding with him as to the mode of 
succession, he will be prepared to deduct for the benefit of the Sultan the 
fourth part of the taxes, but he would have neither control, nor controller, 
either with regard to the. levying of duties, or with regard to disburse- 
ments. 

Furthermore, as Mehemet continues the armaments, and forces those 
who are liable to pay taxes to do so before the same are due, the discon- 
tent is still the same: commercial people apprehend new obstructions ; and 
the holders of property know not what to do with respect to the monopo- 
lies which the new Treaty of Commerce does away with, and which 
Mehemet Ali manifests a disposition to maintain as heretofore. 


3 C 


378 
No. 221. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received April 17.) 


My Lord, Therapia, March 29, 1841. 


RECHID PASHA and Ahmed Fethi Pasha are removed from office. 
Rifat Bey has been made Minister for Foreign Affairs, and Tahir Pasha, 
Capudan Pasha ; Said Pasha, late Capudan Pasha, succeeds Ahmed Fethi 
Pasha in the post of Minister of Commerce. These changes were pub- 
lished this morning. 

I think the news so important that I despatch the messenger without 
waiting for the notification from the Porte of the adoption of the decision 
of the Council upon the affair of Mehemet Ali. I have no reason to doubt 
of that decision being approved of by the Sultan. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No, 222. 


Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received April 17.) 


My Lord, Vienna, April 9, 1841. 
- ON the 31st of March last I announced to your Lordship the attitude 
which the Court of Austria was on the point of taking in the Turco- 
Egyptian Question. The instructions enjoining that attitude were sent 
to Baron Stiirmer two days later, and afterwards to Prince Esterhazy for 
communication to your Lordship. The decision, however, of the Austrian 
Cabinet is of so much importance, that having obtained a copy of Prince 
Metternich’s despatch in which it is conveyed, I inclose it to your Lord- 
ship. Prince Metternich therein declares, that if the Divan does not adopt 
the modifications to the firman of investiture recommended by the Con- 
ference of London, His Imperial Majesty will consider himself released 
from the obligations he had contracted by the Treaty of J uly. I have no 
doubt but what it is the intention of this Cabinet to act up to this declara- 
tion, in which course it will assuredly be followed by that of Prussia. 
I have, &c,, 
(Signed) BEAUV ALE. 


Inclosure in No. 222. 
Prince Metternich to Baron de Stiirmer. 


. Vienne, le 2 Avril, 1841. 

J’AI regu le 29 vos rapports du 17 Mars. Leur contenu a fixé notre 
attention la plus sérieuse, parcequ’il constate l’existence d’une position 
sans précédens dans les fastes de la diplomatie. Ce fait ressort des con- 
sidérations suivantes. | 

Quand les grandes Cours Européennes se décidérent a intervenir dans 
le conflit entre la Porte et Méhémet Ali, elles eurent soin d’établir un 
centre d’entente, et elles firent choix a cet effet de la capitale de la Grande 
Bretagne. Elles revétirent leurs organes dans ce point d’union de la 
qualité de Plénipotentiaires, et invitérent la Porte 4 envoyer de son cété 
un Plénipotentiaire 4 Londres. C’est dans ce centre que furent arrétés la 
Convention et les autres Actes du 15 Juillet, 1840; et c’est de ce méme 
point qu’émanérent les instructions adressées, le 14 Novembre et le 17% 
Décembre, aux Représentans des Cours respectives 4 Constantinople, la 
Note Collective du 30 Janvier dernier, ainsi que les instructions aux 
Amiraux durant tout le cours des opérations actives. 


379 


Outre ce foyer de délibération et de décision, il a tout naturellement 
di exister des points, ot l’on a adressé les directions, et ob par conséquent 
devait s’exercer l’action tant morale que matérielle. Ces points étaient 
ceux de Constantinople et d’Alexandrie 4 l’égard de I’action morale, et la 
Syrie pour ce qui concernait l’action matérielle. I] est évident que, suivant 
Pordre hiérarchique, c’est du centre de Londres qu’ont dd émaner les 
ordres, et que la tache des autres points était d’exécuter ces ordres. Tout 
ce qui tendait a intervertir cette régle, a di exposer la cause a des dangers ; 
et aujourd’hui encore toute marche qui s’en écarte, ne saurait que créer de | 
graves compromissions pour la Porte et pour les Cours ses Alliées. 

Les rapports de votre Excellence du 17 Mars ne renferment que trop 
de preuves, que les affaires ne sont point placées dans les voies qu’il 
serait si nécessaire de leur voir suivre. Quelle suite, par exemple, a-t-il 
été donnée aux prescriptions si précises de la Note Collective du 30 Janvier ? 
Quel compte le Divan et les organes des Quatre Cours ont-ils tenu des 
Opinions que cette piéce exprimait ? Nous voyons d’un cété la Porte 
indécise sur le parti qu’elle aura a prendre au sujet des représentations 
faites par Méhémet Ali contre quelques Articles du firman d’investiture, et 
de l’autre, les Représentans des Quatre Cours ne pas savoir prendre con- 
seil des paroles si claires de la Note Collective mentionnée ci-dessus. En 
vérité, M. le Baron, c’est 4 n’y rien comprendre, tandisque ce qui saute 
aux yeux, c’est le mal qu’un état de choses pareil fait a lintérét bien 
entendu de la Porte, et les graves compromissions auxquelles il expose 
jusqu’a Phonneur méme des Quatre Puissances. Aussi l’Empereur notre 
Auguste Maitre n’entend-il pas rester dans une position pareille, et c’est 
parceque telle est la détermination bien arrétée de Sa Majesté Impériale, 
que je vous transmets les directions suivantes, dont vous aurez soin de ne 
point dévier. 

Le dernier courier Anglais et l’expédition que je vous ai adressée le 
26 Mars dernier, ont répondu d’avance et a fond aux scrupules de tout 
genre qui peuvent avoir influé sur la marche des organes des Quatre 
Cours, jusqu’a la date de vos rapports du 17 Mars. Il est a présumer, 
que dans lintervalle qui s’est écoulé entre cette date et larrivée des ex- 
péditions susdites de Londres et de Vienne, les choses seront demeurées 
im statu quo a Constantinople. Ayant réclamé des ordres de leurs Cours 
respectives, vous et MM. vos collégues serez, 4 vue de pays, restés en 
suspens. Quel parti prendrez-vous lorsque vous serez en possession des 
derniéres directions du centre de Londres? Je ne saurais pas le préjuger, 
mais je crois pouvoir me flatter, que vous aurez uniformément senti la 
nécessité de regarder ces directions comme préjugeant d’avance les ordres 
que chacun d’entre vous a réclamés de sa Cour, et que dés-lors vous 
n’aurez point tardé 4 donner au Divan des conseils conformes aux vues 
des Quatre Puissances. Si tel devait étre le cas, l’affaire approchera de 
sa fin avant l’arrivée du présent courier. ' 

Cependant, comme dans le cours de l’affaire nous avons déja. été 
exposés plus d’une fois 4 nous voir décus dans notre attente, voici la ligne 
de conduite que je vous trace pour le cas ou les derniéres directions du 
centre de Londres auraient éprouvé le méme sort que les précédentes. 

Vous inviterez MM. vos Collégues de Grande Bretagne, de Prusse, et de 
Russie 2 une réunion, et vous leur ferez connaitre 

Que |l’Empereur notre Auguste Maitre, décidé pour sa part a se 
maintenir dans les limites des arrétés pris en commun par les Plénipoten- 
tiaires des Quatre Cours dans le centre de Londres, vous ordonne d’insister 
prés du Divan sur l’admission des modifications que ces _mémes Cours 
désirent voir apporter, dans l’intérét méme de la Porte, a certains Articles 
du Firman d’investiture du Pacha d’Egypte ; xe 

Qu’en vertu de cette décision vous étes chargé (inviter MM. vos 
Collégues 4 se réunir avec vous dans une démarche commune a faire dans 
ce sens envers la Porte; Que dans le cas ou cette union n’aurait point 
lieu, vous étes chargé de faire envers le Divan Ja démarche en 
question, soit seul, soit avec ceux de MM. vos Collégues qui se joindront a 
Vous ; 4 P 

Qu’en vous acquittant envers le Divan des conseils conformes aux 
arrétés pris dans le centre de ae et dans le cas du refus de Sa 

lod 


380 


Hautesse d’obtempérer aux voeux de ses Alliés, vous aurez a déclarer a la 
Porte, que Sa Hautesse étant maitresse de ses décisions, Sa Majesté 
Impériale par contre regarderait, pour sa part, comme epuisce, la tache 
dont elle s’était chargée par les engagemens qu’elle a contractés le 15 
Juillet, 1840, et qu’elle se considérera dés-lors comme rendue a une entiére 
liberté de position et d’action. 
Recevez, &c., 
(Signé) METTERNICH. 


(Translation.) 


Vienna, April 2, 1841. 
I RECEIVED on the 29th, your reports of the 17th of March. 


Their contents have attracted our most serious attention, because they 
prove the existence of a position without precedent in the annals of 
diplomacy. This fact results from the following considerations. __ 

When the Great Powers of Europe decided upon interposing in the 
conflict between the Porte and Mehemet Ali, they took care to establish a 
central place of deliberation; and they selected for that purpose the 
capital of Great Britain. They invested their organs at this point of 
union with the character of Plenipotentiaries, and invited the Porte on its 
part to send a Plenipotentiary to London. In this central point the 
Convention and the other Acts of the 15th of July, 1840, were determined 
upon; and from the same point proceeded the instructions addressed on 
the 14th of November, and the 17th of December, to the Representatives 
of the respective Courts at Constantinople, the Collective Note of the 30th 
of January last, and likewise the instructions to the Admirals during 
the whole course of the active operations. 

Besides this point of deliberation and of decision, there were naturally 
other points to which directions were addressed, and where consequently 
moral as well as material action was to be called into play. These points 
were Constantinople and Alexandria with respect to moral action, and 
Syria in as much as material action was concerned. It is evident that, 
according to strict order, instructions were to emanate from the 
central point of London, and that the duty at the other points was, to 
carry those instructions into execution. Everything that had a tendency 
to invert this rule, necessarily exposed the cause to danger; and even 
still at the present time, every step which deviates from it, cannot fail 
seriously to compromise both the Porte and the Courts its Allies. 

Your Excellency’s reports of the 17th of March furnish but too many 
proofs that matters are not placed in the channel which it was so neces- 
sary to see them follow. What, for example, has been the result of the 
very precise instructions of the Collective Note of the 30th of January ? 
What attention have the Divan and the Agents of the Four Courts paid 
to the opinions expressed in that document? On the one hand we see 
the Porte undecided as to the course which it will have to take on the 
subject of the representations made by Mehemet Ali against certain 
Articles of the firman of investiture, and on the other, the Representatives 
of the Four Powers, ignorant how to take counsel from the very clear 
words of the Collective Note above-mentioned. In truth, M. le Baron, it 
is impossible to make it out, while what is evident, is the evil which such 
a state of things occasions to the interests well understood of the Porte, 
and the serious manner in which it compromises even the very honour of 
the Four Powers. Wherefore the Emperor our august master has no 
intention of remaining in such a position, and it is because such is the 
fixed determination of His Imperial Majesty that I transmit to you the 
following directions, from which you will be careful not to depart. 

The last English messenger, and the instructions which I addressed 
to you on the 26th of March last, have replied by anticipation and entirely 
to the scruples of all kinds which may have had an influence on the pro- 
ceedings of the organs of the Four Courts up to the date of your reports 
of the 17th March. It is to be presumed that in the interval which 


38]. 


elapsed between that date and the arrival of the aforesaid instructions 
from London and from Vienna, matters will have remained stationary at 
Constantinople. You and your colleagues, having applied for the orders 
of your respective Courts, will, under those circumstances, have remained 
inactive. What course will you take when you shall be in possession of 
the last instructions from the centre of London? I cannot determine 
that beforehand, but I think [ may flatter myself that you will have 
uniformly felt the necessity of considering these instructions to have 
anticipated the orders which each of you has applied for to his Court, and 
that thereupon you will not have delayed offering to the Divan advice in 
conformity with the views of the Four Powers. If that should be the case, 
the affair will be drawing to its close before the arrival of the present 
courier. 

Nevertheless, as in the course of this affair we have already been 
exposed more than once to see ourselves deceived in our expectations, this 
is the line of conduct which I prescribe to you, in the event of the last 
directions of the centre of London having experienced the same fate as 
those which preceded them. 

You will invite your Colleagues of Great Britain, Prussia, and Russia, 
to a conference, and you will acquaint them: 

That the Emperor our august master, being, for his part, resolved to 
keep himself within the bounds of the decisions taken in common by the 
Plenipotentiaries of the Four Courts in the centre of London, enjoins you 
to insist upon the Divan admitting the modifications which those same 
Courts desire, for the interest even of the Porte, to see introduced into 
certain Articles of the firman of investiture of the Pasha of Egypt ; 

That, in pursuance of this resolution, you are directed to invite your 
Colleagues to join you in a common step to be taken at the Porte to this 
effect ;—That in case such union could not be effected, you are directed to 
take the step in question towards the Divan, either alone, or with those of 
your Colleagues who will join you; 

That in offering to the Divan advice in conformity with the decisions 
adopted in the centre of London, and in case the Sultan should refuse to 
listen to the wishes of his Allies, you will have to declare to the Porte 
that, the Sultan being the master of his own resolutions, His Imperial 
Majesty,:on the other hand, would, for his part, consider accomplished, 
the task which he had, by the engagements contracted on the 15th of 
July, undertaken to perform, and that he will thenceforward consider 
himself as restored to entire liberty of position and action. 

(Signed) METTERNICH. 


es 


No. 223. 


The Marquess of Clanricarde to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received 
April 19.) 


(Extract.) St. Petersburgh, April 6, 1841. 


YOUR Lordship’s despatches, to the 16th of March, were delivered 
to me on the 29th ultimo by the messenger Fricker. 

The latest despatches that Count Nesselrode has received from Con- 
stantinople, give an account. of the consultations and conduct of the 
Representatives of the Four Allied Powers, upon the communication to 
them of Mehemet Ali’s reply to the Firmans sent to him, and of Said . 
Muhib Effendi’s report, and upon the report that had reached them from 
Vienna, of the Conference of London having been brought to a close. 

1 have communicated to his Excellency the instructions conveyed in 
your Lordship’s despatch to Lord Ponsonby, of the 16th of March, and 
Count Nesselrode highly approves of them. He says they point out the 
mode in which the Porte may put an end to the difficulties which the 
Firmans sent to Alexandria have created, without. derogation to the 
Sultan’s authority, or offence to his dignity. 


SS LS 


= 


382 


No. 224. 
Lord William Russell to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received April 19.) 


(Extract.) Berlin, April 14, 1841. 


BARON WERTHER told me in the course of conversation, 
that the Prussian Minister in London having initialed the Eastern 
Convention, the Government looked upon the Treaty of July as termi- 
nated. 


cere nS AR SE SE 


No. 225. 


Mr. Bulwer to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received April 19.) 


My Lord, Paris, April 16, 1841. 


YOUR Lordship will probably have observed the discussion on the 
supplementary budget, and the various efforts which were made to draw 
from M. Guizot any imprudent revelations as to the recent Convention 
between France and the Great Powers, Parties to the Treaty of the i5th 
of July. Your Lordship will also very probably have noticed the caution 
displayed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs on this occasion; a caution 
not diminished by the declaration, that he hoped soon to be able to 
announce that “the armed peace” with which the session had com- 
menced, had been exchanged for one of a more regular and tranquil- 
lizing nature. But the passages in this debate (Wednesday) to which 
I particularly wish to draw your Lordship’s attention, are two decla- 
rations of M. Thiers. The first (made by accepting the observation 
of some foreign Minister), that France aspired to, and at the time of his 
Ministry was about to arrive at, the possession of the whole coast of Africa, 
and that this domination was to be extended by an alliance with the 
Pasha of Egypt, from the extreme of the Mediterranean up to the Red Sea. 
The second, that Arabia and Syria were merely causes of weakness and 
expense to Mehemet Ali, and consequently no losses to him, but that his 
being deprived of them was a serious loss to France, because she had 
thereby commanded the Euphrates and the Persian Gulf, 

When I remember that the French Government in general, and 
M. Thiers in particular, always protested that France had no sort of 
interest in the Pasha extending his sway over Syria, and that their whole 
objection to driving him therefrom was the difficulty of the enterprise, I 
own that I am somewhat startled by the present disclosure. At the 
same time, I think it will give Her Majesty’s Government increased 
reason to congratulate themselves on the policy they have pursued. 

T have, &c., 
(Signed) HENRY L. BULWER. 


No. 226. 


Mr. Bulwer to Viscount Palmerston—(Received April 19.) 


My Lord, Paris, April 16, 1841. 

iT having come to my knowledge that some Members of the French 
Government had observed, that at the same time that they withdrew from 
all share in the proceedings between the Sultan and Mehemet Ali, they, in 
fact, afforded a protection, to the latter by refusing to sign any common 
Act with the other Gréat European Powers, until the affairs of the 
Kast were brought to a conclusion, inasmuch as they thereby disposed 
those Powers to settle the pending question promptly by concessions to 
the Pasha of Egypt; I thought it advisable to represent to M. Guizot the 
great inconveniences that might arise, if the Pasha should construe this 


383 
delay or reluctance on the part of the French Government into a support 
of all his pretensions, many of which seem to be too extravagant to be 
seriously discussed: and I asked M. Guizot whether, under such circum- 
stances, it might not be advisable to sign the recent Convention with 
respect to the Bosphorus at once, and by thereby depriving Mehemet of 
the support with which he might delude himself, bring the whole matter 
at once and promptly to a termination. 

M. Guizot replied to me by saying, that he did not mean to assert 
that the refusal of the French Government to sign the Convention in 
question, until Mehemet Ali and the Sultan had come to terms, might not 
afford a certain protection to the former; but, said he, “I have taken 
care that Mehemet Ali should know that this protection is limited, and 
that I by no means approve of all his pretensions; on the contrary, 
indeed, I agree with you that many are exaggerated and absurd; and I 
have urged him peremptorily to abandon them. My notion, however, I 
tell you frankly, is, that if these affairs are to be settled speedily, as I 
wish them, and as you think they ought to be, this can only be effected 
by your Government pressing the Porte on one side, and my pressing 
Mehemet Ali on the other. But were all the signatures affixed to the 
recent Convention, neither your Government nor mine would have the same 
motives for urgency. The remaining affair then would be left in the hands 
of the parties themselves, who would protract the negotiation ad infinitum; 
and thus, after having accomplished all the forms by which the business 
should be terminated, it would remain in a year hence, just where it 
is now.” 

“ But,” said I, “supposing you will only sign the Convention recently 
agreed to between yourself and the other Great Powers, when that 
between Mehemet and the Porte is concluded, and that Mehemet insists 
upon all the conditions which he has asked for, many of which you your- 
self consider unreasonable, will you not be allowing the exaggeration and 
intemperance of another to direct your own policy from that which is 
desirable and just?” ‘1 have observed to you,” M. Guizot replied, “ that 
my consideration for Mehemet Ali has its bounds. I have told him he 
must abandon much that he pretends to. I believe he will do so. If he 
does not, then certainly I shall abandon him.” 

“Of course,’ I observed, ‘‘ you consider his pretension not to pay 
any tribute for two or three years as out of the question?” <‘‘Certainly.” 
‘You think he should be bound by the Treaties of the Porte with Foreign 
Powers?” “Most assuredly.”’ “ You deem it proper that the Hatti- 
Sheriff of Gulhané should be the law in Egypt as in the rest of the 
Ottoman Empire?” “Ido. Im short,” M. Guizot continued, “there are 
but three points on which the Pasha has any reason to insist : 

‘“‘Ist. The grant of the hereditary succession in the direct male line 
of his family. 

“2nd. The payment of a fixed tribute, instead of what is called the 
fourth of the revenue of the province he governs ;—a valuation which 
could never be fairly made, which would occasion all sorts of trouble, and 
introduce, if it is meant that the object demanded should be really 
obtained, a double set of revenue officers, and consequently a double 
expenditure in the collection of the taxes, as well as never ceasing 
disputes as to their amount. 

“3rd. I think the restriction on his appointment of officers, confining 
him to the rank of Captain, a hardship and an inconvenience which would 
render the army, for whose discipline and conduct he is responsible, 
almost free from his control.” ; 

I suggested that this last was practically a minor question, to which 
M. Guizot rather assented, and seemed to think that it might be possibly 
settled by Mehemet’s presenting the superior ee to the Sultan for 
approbation, as he would thus have a certain shar€ in their promotion by 
his recommendation, though the act itself would proceed from the Sultan, 
and form a natural part of his supreme power. 

He then added, “I have thus talked with you on all these matters, 
because, the subject having been started, I was desirous that you should 
know my real opinions, and not suppose that I, directly or indirectly; 


384, 


sustain the Pasha in his unreasonable demands; but I do not pretend to 
take, on the contrary I most cautiously abstain from taking, any share 
in the arrangement which may be brought about: I do not wish to be 
mixed up in it, or to appear in any way init. I have no conditions to 
make for Mehemet Ali; I have nothing to do with him or the conditions 
he may accept. I only say, that until the affairs in the East shall have 
been settled, I cannot sign a document which begins by declaring that 
they are so; and besides, I know well enough my parliamentary position, 
and that I could not so act, even if I were inclined.” 


I have, &c., 
(Signed) HENRY L. BULWER. 
No. 227. 


Colonel Hodges to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewed April 17.) 


My Lord, Constantinople, March 30, 1841. 


I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Lordship’s 
despatch of the 2nd of March, instructing me to return to Alexandria 
whenever the Austrian, Prussian, and Russian Consuls-General are ready 
to do so. 

I have just returned from seeing the Representatives of Austria and 
Russia, who have acquainted me, that from recent communications from 
their Courts they do not consider themselves authorised to direct the 
return of the Consuls-General of those Powers until they receive further 
instructions on this head, which they expect to have in a few days. 

As for myself, I am ready to proceed to Alexandria at an hour’s 
notice. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) G. LLOYD HODGES. 


No. 228. 


Viscount Palmerston to Mr. Bulwer. 


Sir, Foreign Office, April 20, 1841. 

YOUR despatches to the 16th of April have been received and laid 
before the Queen. 

Her Majesty’s Government approve of the language which you have 
held in conversation with M. Guizot upon the affairs of the Levant, as 
reported in your despatch of the 16th instant. 

Lam, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 229. 
Viscount Palmerston to Lord William Russell. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, April 21, 1841. 

I HAVE received your Lordship’s despatch of the 14th of April, and 
with reference to that part in which you report that Baron Werther had 
stated to you that the Prussian Government look upon the Treaty of J uly 
as terminated, I have to instruct your Lordship to state to Baron Werther 
that a question cannot be really finished merely. by saying that it is so ; and 
Prussia having by the Treaty of July taken towards the Sultan and the ~ 
other three Powers an engagement to determine Mehemet Ali to accept 
the arrangement specified in that Treaty, Her Majesty’s Government are. 
persuaded that Prussia will keep that engagement. But it appears by 


385 


Mehemet Ali’s last letter to the Grand Vizier, that, at the date of that 
letter, he objected to some of the fundamental points of the arrangement 
specified in the Treaty of July. 
Iam, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 230. 


Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, April 21, 1841. 
I TRANSMIT to your Excellency a copy of a despatch from Her 
Majesty’s Ambassador at Vienna, inclosing a copy of an instruction given 
by Prince Metternich to the Internuncio on the 2nd of April, directing 
him, if necessary, to declare to the Porte, that if the Divan will not adopt 
the modifications in the firman of the 13th of February, recommended 
by the Conference of London, His Imperial Majesty will consider himself 
released from the obligations he contracted by the Treaty of July. 

I have to acquaint your Excellency, that Her Majesty’s Government 
entirely concur in the view of this matter taken by the Austrian Govern- 
ment, and are prepared to take the same course. 

fam, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 231. 
Mr. Bulwer to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewed April 22.) 


My Lord, Paris, April 19, 1841. 
I HAVE the honour to observe that Count Appony has informed me, 
that he had a conversation with M. Guizot on the subject to which my 
despatch of the 16th instant refers, and that that Minister repeated to him 
almost verbatim what he had previously stated to myself. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) HENRY L. BULWER, 


nema” 


No. 232. 


Mr. Bulwer to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received April 25.) 


(Extract.) Paris, April 23, 1841. 


I HAVE the honour to inform your Lordship that M. Guizot was 
obliging enough to put into my hands a despatch dated the 30th, which 
he had received from M. de Pontois, and which stated the recent changes 
that had taken place in the Government at Constantinople. This change 
is described as having been long meditated by a powerful party, though 
its immediate cause was a trivial dispute on some commercial matter 
between the Grand Vizier and the Minister of Commerce, who has been 
just displaced; and its success is attributed to the influence of persons 
opposed to the recent reforms, and also to the difficulties which Rechid 
Pasha made to admitting those modifications in the Hatti-Sheriff, which 
seemed to. be desired by the Great Powers, as necessary to a definitive 
settlement between the Sultan and the Pasha of Egypt. 


3D 


386 


No. 233. 


Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Receiwed April 23.) 


My Lord, Vienna, April 13, 1841]. 


THE present courier bears an instruction to Chekib Effendi, by 
which the Porte expresses its readiness to modify the firman of inves- 
titure to the extent of securing the succession to Ibrahim Pasha, or to 
such other of Mehemet Ali’s sons as he shall designate, reserving at the 
same time the choice in all subsequent cases to the Sultan, upon the 
recommendation of the principal persons of the country. This appears 
to me the worst mode that has yet been hit upon, as it would expose 
Egypt to a perpetual native and foreign canvass, in which the principal 
Powers of Europe would take part. It would transfer to that country in 
another shape all the evils under which Poland fell. The Porte, however, 
having conceded thus far, it is to be hoped that the united expression of 
the sentiments of the Four Powers will obtain the rest. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) BEAUVALE. 


No. 234. 


Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received April 23.) 


My Lord, Vienna, April 14, 1841. 


I HAVE communicated to Prince Metternich your Lordship’s des- 
patch of the 2nd of April, addressed to myself. With the principles and 
reasoning's of that despatch the Prince entirely agrees. He draws, how- 
ever, a marked distinction as to the relative importance of the objects 
therein treated. He considers the Four Powers pledged to use their best 
endeavours with the Sultan to obtain from him the concession of hereditary 
succession in favour of the descendants of Mehemet Ali, either according 
to the European rule of primogeniture, or the Eastern one of seniority, 
under the conditions already repeatedly expressed ; but this having been 
obtained, he considers the remaining matters in dispute between the 
Sultan and the Pasha as relating merely to administrative affairs, in 
which the Powers will interfere by counsel for the advantage of both 
parties, but wherein the advice they may tender will be regulated by 
circumstances and by the fuller information they may gradually acquire, 
leaving to them a great latitude of deliberation, and binding them to no 
specific course of action. 

With regard to the tribute, Prince Metternich fully adopts your 
‘Lordship’s reasonings, and will doubtless assist in obtaining for the 
Sultan the arrears which Mehemet Ali shows a disposition to withhold, 
and in fixing the amount of tribute at a reasonable sum. Whether 
a fourth of the gross revenue be a reasonable amount or no, he cannot 
determine, but he is of opinion that an approach to the knowledge 
of the amount of net revenue under the new system imposed upon 
Mehemet Ali is the only basis upon which the proposition of tribute 
can be justly determined. As a preliminary to this, it is evident that the 
system of imposts must be previously fixed, and if the calculation is to 
be made upon these data, it will probably require the employment of 
Commissioners named for that purpose, before the question can be finally 
settled. Whenever the principle upon which the tribute is to be deter- 
mined has been agreed upon, the Prince is of opinion that it will be 
much for the interest of the Porte to commute the estimated produce for 
a fixed sum, instead of receiving a proportion of the revenue,—a system 
which would expose it to constant fraud and uncertainty. 


387) 


With these additions, your Lordship may consider the views ex- 
pressed by you in the despatch in question, as having received Prince 
Metternich’s full assent. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) BEAUVALE. 


No. 235. 


Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received April 23.) 


My Lord, Vienna, April 14, 1841. 


I HAVE communicated to Prince Metternich your Lordship’s in- 
structions to Lord Ponsonby conveyed in your despatch to that Ambassador 
of the 2d of April. The Prince entirely agrees with them, and has sent 
a corresponding instruction to the Internuncio. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) BEAUVALE. 


No. 236. 


Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received April 23.) 


(Extract.) Vienna, April 14, 1841. 

PRINCE METTERNICH has received intelligence of the arrival of 
the Druse Chiefs from Egypt at Beyrout. The French Consul there im- 
mediately sent them word that they owed their liberation to the inter- 
vention of France, and prepared a sort of triumphal entry for them, 


headed by his cavasses. 
The Turkish force in that country is stated by these advices to 


amount to 30,000 men. 
ce eT na 9 OS TER Se A os SO a Serene ela eer 


Wo.-2o7. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received April 25.) 


My Lord, Therapia, April 6, 1841. 


THIS day I have received your Lordship’s despatch, containing draft 
of a Protocol of a Conference between the Plenipotentiaries of Great 
Britain, Austria, Prussia, Russia, and the Sublime Porte, and a draft of a 
Convention between Great Britain, Austria, France, Prussia, and Russia, 
on the one part, and the Sublime Porte on the other part, which have 
been provisionally agreed to by the respective Plenipotentiaries, and which 
Her Majesty’s Government hope will soon be signed by those Plenipo- 


tentiaries. 
I have, & 


Cc. 
Gigned) | PONSONBY. 


eee 


3 D2 


388 


No. 238. 
Chekib Effendi to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received April 28.) 


27 Avril, 1841. 


L’EXECUTION pleine et entiére du Firman Impérial par lequel le 
Sultan a daigné réintégrer Méhémet Ali dans le Gouvernement de Egypte, 
en accordant, en méme tems, la faveur de V’hérédité pour ses descendans, 
ayant éprouvé quelques difficultés, Sa Hautesse n’a cru faire mieux que de 
faire un nouvel appel au concours de ses Alliés pour les applanir. En 
conséquence elle a chargé le Soussigné, Ambassadeur de la Sublime Porte 
prés Sa Majesté Britannique, de soumettre 4 son Excellence Lord Palmer- 
ston, ainsi qu’aux Représentans des Cours Alliées, les points qui ont 
motivés ces difficultés, et de présenter en méme tems 4 Lord Palmerston 
‘la décision que Sa Hautesse vient de faire 4 ce sujet dans l’intérét de son 
empire. Pleine de la confiance dans la bonne intention de ses Alliés en 
sa faveur, Sa Hautesse espére qu’ils voudront bien réaliser sa décision. 

Le Soussigné s’empresse de remettre 4 son Excellence Lord Palmer- 
ston, d’aprés l’ordre de Sa Hautesse, la copie des instructions qu’il a 
recues a cet égard du Gouvernement de Sa Hautesse, et comptant sur tant 
de preuves de bienveillance que son Excellence et MM. les Représentans 
ont montrées pour la cause du Sultan, il ose réclamer leur aide et leur 
assistance, en les priant de trouver un moyen de résoudre, d’une maniére 
conforme a la décision de Sa Hautesse, les difficultés qui ont arrété 
jusqw’ici Parrangement définitif de la Question Egyptienne. 

Le Soussigné saisit, etc., 


(Signé) CHEKIB. 


(‘Translation.) 


April 27, 1841. 
THE full and entire execution of the Imperial Firman, by which the 
‘Sultan has been pleased to reinstate Mehemet Ali in the Government of 
Egypt, granting at the same time the favour of hereditary succession for 
his descendants, having encountered some difficulties, His Highness has 
considered that he could not do better than make a fresh appeal to the 
concurrence of his Allies, in order to smooth them away. Accordingly, 
he has directed the Undersigned, Ambassador of the Sublime Porte to 
Her Britannic Majesty, to submit to his Excellency Lord Palmerston, as 
well as to the Representatives of the Allied Courts, the points which have 
occasioned these difficulties, and at the same time to lay before Lord 
Palmerston the decision now adopted by His Highness on this matter with 
reference to the interest of his Empire. Full of confidence in the good 
intentions of the Allies towards him, His Highness trusts that they will 
be pleased to give effect to his decision. 
The Undersigned hastens to deliver to his Excellency Lord Palmer- 
ston, in obedience to the orders of the Sultan, a copy of the instructions 
which he has received on this point from His Highness’s Government, 
and reckoning upon the numerous proofs of good-will which his Excellency 
_and the Representatives have manifested for the cause of the Sultan, 
he ventures to request their aid and assistance, begging them to find 
means of solving, in a manner consistent with His Highness’s decision, 
the difficulties which have hitherto prevented the definitive settlement of 
the Egyptian Question. 
The Undersigned, &c., 
(Signed) CHEKIB. 


389 


Inclosure in No. 238. 


Instructions transmitted by the Sublime Porte to Chekib Effendi, 
(Received from Chekib Effendi privately April 25.) 


(Traduction.) 8 Safar, 1257 


} Avril, 1341° 

VOTRE Excellence n’ignore pas que le trés-honorable Said Muhib 

Effendi a été dernitrement envoyé en Egypte pour apporter a son Excel- 

lence Méhémet Ali la bonne nouvelle de la faveur signalée que Sa Hautesse 

a daigné lui accorder, pour lui remettre le firman Impérial, contenant 

certaines conditions indispensables, et pour concerter avec lui plusieurs 
points nécessaires. 


XX 


Ayant envoyé a votre Excellence des copies du dit firman Impérial, 
des dépéches, et d’autres piéces qui ont été écrites A ce sujet, nous devons 
admettre qu’elles lui sont parvenues 4 Vheure qu’il est, et qu’elle sera ainsi 
informée de la résolution souveraine et des principes réglementaires qui 
ont été établis. Votre Excellence verra de méme A quel point se trouve 
actuellement la Question d’Egypte par la lecture des rapports que nous 
avons recus récemment de la part de Méhémet Ali, de Said Muhib Effendi, 
et dont nous avons eu également soin de vous transmettre des copies. 

Le dit Pacha a refusé d’accepter quelques unes des conditions susmen- 
tionnées, procédé que nous trouvons inconvénant, puisqu’il était convenu 
qwil prouverait sa prétendue soumission d’une maniére non conditionnelle. 

Comme donc la Question Egyptienne a été dans tout son cours traitée 
et réglée de concert et d’accord avec les augustes Cours Alliées, et avec leur 
assentiment expressément demandé, et comme par conséquent la nature 
méme de l’affaire exige que les points encore en suspens soient également 
résolus et arrangés d@’un commun accord avec les dites Cours, nous avons 
consulté MM. les quatre Représentans résidant dans cette capitale, en 
demandant leur avis sur la maniére dont la Sublime Porte devait agir 
dans cette circonstance. 

Ils nous ont répondu que la non-acceptation par Méhémet Ali des dits 

Articles réglementaires n’ayant pas été prévue, ils n’avaient pas pu 
recevoir la-dessus de nouvelles instructions de leurs Gouvernemens 
respectifs, et que dés-lors ils ne pouvaient soumettre aucun conseil a Sa 
Hautesse le Sultan; par conséquent la question a été méditée et discutée 
entre les Ministres de la Sublime Porte, et il a été décidé qu’on écrirait a 
votre Excellence dans le sens suivant. 
Un des points que Méhémet Ali refuse d’accepter est celui de l’héré- 
dité, qui, selon lui, devrait étre réglé d’aprés le seignoriat. Mais si par 
la suite un de ses fils majeurs devait étre incapable de conduire l’adminis- 
tration du pays, et que le Gouvernement de l’Egypte dit passer comme 
héritage entre ses mains, lordre dans cette province en serait nécessaire- 
ment troublé. Or, la Sublime Porte ayant a cceur la bonne administra- 
tion de Egypte, tout autant que celle des autres provinces de I'Empire, 
voulant en outre prévenir tout inconvénient que cette Question pourrait. 
faire naitre plus tard, et accorder en méme tems au dit Pacha une nou- 
velle marque de faveur et de bienveillance, elle promet dés-d-présent de 
-conférer le Gouvernement de Egypte a [brahim Pacha ou a tel autre de 
‘ses fils que Méhémet Ali lui-méme choisirait de son vivant, 4 condition 
-qu’ensuite le droit d’élection appartiendra de nouveau a Sa Hautesse. 

Comme seconde alternative, nous proposons ce qui suit: le Pacha 
nous ayant représenté que le véritable caractére et la capacité person- 
nelle de l’individu qui deviendra ensuite Gouverneur de l’Egypte ne pour- 
ront pas étre connus ici, tandis que la on pourra trés-bien les apprécier, 
un de ses descendans devra étre choisi en Egypte par les membres de sa 

famille, et par les notables du pays, et proposé 4 la Sublime Porte; il sera 
_confirmé et nommé par Sa Hautesse le Sultan. | ; 

Pour ce qui concerne les lois civiles et militaires, ce point constitue 
une des principales stipulations du Traité d’ Alliance. 

Comme done les Cours Alliées auront évidemment la bonté d’en faire 

adopter le principe et les détails,:il ne devra pas étre question’ de le 
modifier, ni de le changer. 


390 


La maniére de la perception de l'impét étant sur le point d’étre réglée 
et arrangée ici, les lois et réglemens de la Sublime Porte, tant présens 
qu’A venir, devant, ainsi qwil a été établi, étre entiérement exécutés en 
Egypte, les principes qu’on adoptera ici au sujet de la perception de 
Vimpét, seront aussi observés en Egypte. Bref, il faudra ne pas sortir du 
cercle des stipulations fondamentales du Traité. 

-  Méhémet Ali Pacha a trouvé exagérée la demande du quart de 
Vimpét. Mais eu égard a la situation de l’Egypte et 4 son véritable 
revenu, ce chiffre est proportionné aux ressources du pays, de sorte que 
votre Excellence devra employer tous ses efforts pour que ce quart nous soit 
ayé, conformément 4 la premiére décision. Le revenu du Pacha s’éléve 
au-dela de 600,000 bourses. Si toutefois 4 présent ’abolition des monopoles 
et la cessation de certains procédés vexatoires diminueraient le revenu 
d’environ 200,000 bourses, il en resterait encore 400,000 bourses. 

Par le passé, le Pacha entretenait une armée de 80,000 4 100,000 
hommes, tandis qu’a présent il n’en aura que 18,000 4 20,000 hommes, ce 
qui le débarrasse des frais occasionnés par 60,000 4 80,000 hommes de 
troupes. Les sommes qu'il dépensait jusqwici en fourniture pour le 
Hedjas seront dorénavant payées par le Sultan. En outre, ce quart ne se 
rapporte pas A tous les produits de l Egypte, ainsi que le Pacha l’a com- 
pris et écrit: il s’applique seulement aux droits de Douane et a toutes les 
autres recettes de la Province. 

Puisque donc, d’aprés ce qui précéde, il est nécessaire que ce quart 
soit percu en entier, il faudrait tacher d’obtenir Vassentiment des 
Puissances. 

Le changement 4 opérer dans les uniformes des troupes réguliéres de 
lEgypte ; la mutation, le désenrdlement de ces mémes troupes, auxquelles 
doit étre appliquer uniformément le réglement établi pour toutes les 
troupes réguliéres de Sa Hautesse; enfin, les promotions militaires qui 
devront avoir lieu d’aprés les principes suivis par les autres Gouverneurs ; 
sont des objets d’une haute importance, sur lesquels il faut insister. C’est 
donc seulement pour le changement des uniformes qu’on donne un court 
délai. 

Quant a la loi de conscription et aux promotions militaires, on devra 
tacher d’obtenir Vassentiment des Puissances. 

Les divers points qui précédent, ayant été soumis a la sanction de Sa 
Hautesse, elle a daigné ordonner que Von procédat en effet de la maniére 
proposée. Il faut donc, pour ce qui concerne ces questions, recourir au 
Gouvernement Britannique par l’entremise de votre Excellence, et aux 
trois autres Gouvernemens par celle de leurs Légations respectives, con- 
naitre avant tout leur maniére de penser, et agir ensuite en conséquence. 

Des copies de la présente dépéche ont été remises aussi aux Représen- 
tans des dites Puissances, en leur communiquant en méme tems l’état des 
choses actuelles. 

Votre Excellence aura donc, de la maniére susmentionnée, a employer 
tous ses efforts pour obtenir lassentiment des Cours a ce sujet, et pour 
faire par la preuve de sagesse, d’habilité, et de savoir faire. 

En outre, comme le trés-honorable Said Muhib Effendi a da, pour le 
moment, prolonger un peu son séjour en Egypte, votre Excellence voudra 
bien, le plus tot possible, faire connaitre a la Sublime Porte les communi- 
cations officielles que le Gouvernement Britannique sera dans le cas de lui 
faire au sujet des points susmentionnés, ainsi que les nouvelles marques 
d’intérét et de bienveillance qu’il nous donnera a cette occasion. 

C’est a cet effet que nous adressons la présente. 


(Translation.) 
8 Safar, 1257 
April 1, 1847. 


YOUR Excellency is aware that the most honourable Said Muhib 
Effendi was recently sent to Egypt to convey to his Excellency Mehemet 
Ali the good news of the signal favour which his Highness has been 
pleased to grant to him to deliver to him the Imperial Firman containing 
certain indispensable conditions, and to concert with him several 
necessary points. 


; 391 


Having sent to your Excellency copies of the said Imperial Firman, 
of the despatches, and of the other documents which have been written 
on this subject, we must conclude that they have reached you at the 
present time, and that you will thus be informed of the sovereign resolu- 
tion, and of the principles of regulation which have been settled. Your 
Excellency will likewise see the present state of the Egyptian Question, 
by a perusal of the reports which we have lately received from Mehemet 
Ali, from Said Muhib Effendi, and of which we have likewise taken care 
to forward to you copies. 

The said Pasha has refused to accept some of the conditions above- 
mentioned, a proceeding which we consider unsuitable, since it was 
agreed that he should prove unconditionally his pretended submission. 

Since then the Egyptian Question has, in its whole course, been 
treated and settled in concert and in concurrence with the august Allied 
Courts, and with their assent expressly applied for, and as consequently 
the very nature of the business requires that the points still in suspense 
should in like manner be solved and settled by common agreement with 
the said Courts, we have consulted the four Representatives residing in 
this Capital, and asked their opinion as to the manner in which the 
Sublime Porte should, under these circumstances, act. 

They have told us in reply, that as the non-acceptation by Mehemet 
Ali of the said Articles of regulation, had not been anticipated, they had 
not been able to receive fresh instructions from their respective Govern- 
ments thereupon; and that they could not, therefore, offer any advice to 
the Sublime Porte: the question has consequently been considered and 
discussed by the Ministers of the Sublime Porte, and it has been decided 
that your Excellency should be written to to the following effect. 

One of the points which Mehemet Ali refuses to accept is, that of the 
hereditary succession, which, according to him, should be settled by 
seniority. But if hereafter one of his elder children should be incapable 
of carrying on the government of the country, and the Government of 

Egypt must pass as an inheritance into his hands, order would, as a 
necessary consequence thereof, be disturbed in that province. Now the 
Sublime Porte having at heart the good government of Egypt, as much 
as that of the other provinces of the Empire, being moreover desirous to 
guard against all inconvenience which this question might hereafter give 
rise to, and at the same time to grant to the said Pasha a new mark of 
favour and benevolence, it promises even now to confer the Government 
of Egypt on Ibrahim Pasha, or on such other of his sons as Mehemet Ali 
should himself select during his life-time, on condition that afterwards 
the right of election should again belong to the Sultan. 

As a second alternative we propose as follows: the Pasha having 
represented to us that the real character and personal capacity of the 
individual who shall hereafter become Governor of Egypt, cannot be 
known here, whereas they may be very well appreciated there, one of his 
descendants shall be chosen in Egypt by the members of his family, and 
by the chief people of the country, and proposed to the Sublime Porte ; 
he shall be confirmed and nominated by His Highness the Sultan. 

As regards the civil and military laws, that point forms one of the 
principal stipulations of the Treaty of Alliance. 

Since then the Allied Courts will evidently have the goodness to cause 
its principle and its details to be adopted, there must be no question of 

| modifying it, or of changing it. 

The manner of collecting the duties being on the point of being settled 
and arranged here, the laws and regulations of the Sublime Porte, now and 
hereafter, being, as has been settled, to be entirely carried into execution 
in Egypt, the principles which shall be adopted here respecting the collec- 

~tionof duties, shall also be observed in Egypt. In short, the fundamental 
stipulations of the Treaty must not be departed from. 

Mehemet Ali Pasha has considered the demand of the fourth part of 
the duties to be excessive. But with reference to the situation of Egypt 
and to its real revenue, this sum is in proportion to the resources of the 
country, so that your Excellency will have to employ all your efforts, in 
order that this fourth part may be paid to us in conformity with the first 


392 


decision. The revenue of the Pasha amounts to more than 600,000 purses. 
If, however, at the present time the abolition of the monopolies and the 
cessation of certain vexatious proceedings, should diminish the revenue 
about 200,000 purses, there would still remain 400,000 purses. 

Heretofore, the Pasha maintained an army of 80,000 to 100,000 men, 
whereas at present he will only have 18,000 to 20,000 men, which relieves 
him from the expenses caused by 60,000 to 80,000 troops. "The sums which 
he hitherto expended in remittances to the Hedjaz will hereafter be paid by 
the Sultan. Moreover, this fourth part does not bear upon all the produce 
of Egypt, as the Pasha has understood and written: it applies only to the 
customs-duties and to all the other receipts of the province. 

Since then, from what precedes, it is necessary that the whole of this 
fourth part should be received, the assent of the Powers must be endea- 
voured to be obtained. 

The change to be effected in the uniforms of the regular troops of 
Egypt; the relief, the disbanding of these same troops, to whom the re- 
gulation laid down for all the regular troops of His Highness must be 
uniformly applied ; lastly, the military promotions which must take place 
according to the principles observed by other Governors; are objects of 
high importance which must be insisted upon. Itis only then with regard 
to the change of uniform that a short delay can be granted. 

With regard to the law of conscription and to the military promotions, 
the assent of the Powers must be attempted to be obtained. 

The various points above stated having been submitted to the sanc- 
tion of His Highness, he has been pleased to direct that we should in effect 
proceed in the manner proposed. It is necessary then, as regards these 
questions, to have recourse to the British Government through your 
Excellency, and to the three other Governments through their respective 
Missions, to become in the first instance acquainted with their opinions, 
and then to act accordingly. 

Copies of this despatch have been delivered also to the Representa- 
‘tives of the said Powers, at the same time that the existing state of 
affairs has been made known to them. 

Your Excellency will therefore, as has been said above, have to use 
all your efforts to obtain the assent of the Courts on this matter, and 
evince thereby your sagacity, skill, and ability. 

Moreover, as the most honourable Said Muhib Effendi has necessarily, 
for the time, prolonged a little his stay in Egypt, your Excellency will 
have the goodness as soon as possible to make the Sublime Porte 
acquainted with the official communications which the British Govern- 
ment shall make to you on the points above mentioned, as likewise with 
the fresh tokens of interest and benevolence which it shall afford us on 
this occasion. 

It is for this purpose that we address to you the present despatch. 


No. 239. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received April 30.) 


My Lord, Therapia, April 7, 1841. 
THE inclosed information from Egypt coming from a person ex- 
tremely well acquainted with what is passing in that country, I have 
sent it home, though I doubt not it will appear in the newspapers. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


393 


Inclosure in No, 239. 
Intelligence from Egypt. 


Alexandria, March 26, 1841. 


DURING Mehemet Ali’s stay at Cairo, and since his departure from 
thence, there have been continual council-meetings, under the direction of 
Ibrahim and Sheriff Pashas, to patch up the financial, agricultural, and 
military affairs of this most disorderly Government. | 

In regard of the latter, it is confidently asserted, that in February, 
1840, the whole military force of Mehemet Ali, without reckoning the 
Turkish or the Egyptian Navy, amounted to 221,000 men, including 
irregulars. 

Defection and death have reduced that body to 100,000 at most. 
The new organization is as follows :— 


In Ecypr. 
Infantry of the Line, 13 Regiments, each 3 Battalions of 
1,200 men and officers - - - - 46,800 
Ditto Foot Guards, 2 Regiments Ditto - - ~.. 4,200 
Cavalry of the Line, 7 Regiments of 6 Squadrons each, 
680 men and officers” - - - - - 4,760 
Cavalry, Guards— 
1 Regiment Cuirassiers = - ~ - - - 480 
1 Regiment Lancers” - - - - = - 480 ps 
te. Sots 


Artillery, Foot— 
Two Regiments, each 24 batteries, of 6 guns and 16 men, 
guns, 288 - - - - - - - - 4,608 
Artillery, Horse— . 
One Ditto, of 6 batteries, guns 6, and 16 men, guns 36 - 576 


Regulars, men 65,304 


Among which are many Syrians of all denominations. 


Canpia. 

1 Regiment of Infantry of the Line - - - 3,600 
. SENNAAR. 

3 Regiments of the Line - - - - 10,200 


Regulars, Total 79,104 
To which may be added “ Baltagis,” Veterans, “Sukal 
Hales ;” those totally unfit for service having been 
sent to their villages, (without pension or reward,) 
there remain probably ° - - - 6,000 
Irregulars from Syria—Bashi Bozuks, Arnauts, Na- 
plousians, Horse and Foot, as well as some few of the 
tribes Galas, Rosceyles, Fedahan, Lamoor, and Waled 


Ali, say - - - - - < - 5,000 
- Jrregulars—Egyptians, Mogrebins of Waled Ali, and 
- other tribes (of which there are 30,000 mounted men 
on the western deserts of Egypt,) in aetual service 
say - - - - - - - - - - 5,000 
In ‘the western deserts of Egypt, Howara, Henedi, 
~ Cavat, Orta, &c. &c. - - 3 : : s - 5,000 
Men - - - - 100,104 


Egyptian Fleet, Arsenal 15,000 


Disposable Force, say 115,104 
3 Ei 


394 


This is the show they make on paper. The Syrians, of course, would 
not fight ; the irregulars would cut and run. Of the Egyptians, after the 
first check, none would stand to their colours, but to a man would go 
over to the enemy, when certain of the Sultan’s success and assured of a 
kind reception. | \ “vita 

As an instance of the esprit de corps prevailing in the Pasha’s 
service, when they lately discharged the Sukal Hales from the ranks, and 
sent the poor wretches to their villages to shift as best as they may, 
without recompense for suffering, or provision for premature old age, all 
who even thus left the army went on their way rejoicing and objects of 
envy to their less fortunate companions. . 

To insure their future services, and reward the attachment of the 
officers of the regiments which returned from Syria in skeleton, the Pasha 
has cut off one year’s pay, to cover the losses of matériel unavoidably 
encountered in a retreat which can only find a parallel in that from Moscow. 

The European instructors were last week gratified with an oration 
that was delivered to them by the Minister of War at Cairo, commendatory 
of their services, and those among them whose regiments had disappeared 
(and they were not few) received appointments in the new organization. 

The cavalry are now at grass recruiting their horses. ‘Their chief 
stations are in the Bahera, Menoufieh, and Sherkieyeh Provinces, besides 
detachments at Cairo, Benisoueff and Fayoum. | 

The infantry are principally stationed between Cairo and Damietta, 
and Cairo and Alexandria. Every day. brings in new levies from the 
country, volunteers chained like galley-slaves! The main depdt is at 
Cairo. The fortifications at Damietta are continued without the slightest 
relaxation, and the Rédif are frequently exercised. So much for the 


submission to the Porte and reduction of the army to 18,000 men! | 


while the late creation of a new French Bey, in the person of the 
gentleman who was sent out by M. Thiers to render Alexandria a second 
St. Jean d’Acre, serves as a commentary on the Sultan’s late interdict to 
the nomination of any officer of higher rank than lieutenant! 

The ‘ Ferdé” is levying for the year just began (1257), but, withal, 
under such a system of mystification that no one can well comprehend 
what is doing, since though it is an undoubted fact, that some have 
actually paid, the Government people deny it, pretending that it is not 
for the year 1257, but to make up the arrears of the last five years! 
That is to say, each place with a given population having been valued at 
a given sum per annum, and this sum, according to the hocus-pocus 
system of the finances administration, having, it is said, fallen short 
through the absence, death, or poverty of some, they are now compelling 
those who can pay to make up for the default over and above their own 
share. In this manner it is expected the coffers of His Highness are to 
be replenished, without in the least violating the Sultan’s firman, a thing 
no longer to be thought of by a faithful vassal. The result of the whole, 
however, is, as usual in Egypt, that people are made to pay. 


SNS ne nee 


No. 240. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received April 30.) 


My Lord, . Therapia, April 7, 1841. 

I HAVE the honour to inclose copy of an extract of a letter lately 

received from Cairo, containing information of what is taking place there. 
. "lL have; &c., 

(Signed) PONSONBY. 


395 


Inclosure in No. 240. 


Extract of a letter from Cairo containing intelligence of what is taking 
place in Egypt. 


ADESSO si riorganizza una nuova armata di 60 mila uomini, e 
diversi reggimenti d’Infanteria e Cavalleria ricevettero di gia Vordine di 
recarsi nel’ Basso Egitto. Anche gl istruttori Medici e Farmacisti 
Europei furono lasciati in attivita di servizio. 

Pare che della nostra cittadella abbino il progetto di formare una 
piazza forte, e che le amministrazioni scenderanno nella citta. 

Si voleva riscuotere il Ferdé del 1257, ma per ora venne sospesa 
Vesecuzione, limitandosi ad incassare i soldi dell’anno scorso. 

Frattanto, sono all’incanto diversi appalti, come quella della sena, 
cuojo, &c., &c. L’appalto dei vini e spiriti continua come per lo passato, 
e si vendono perfino alla publica subasta 6 giraffe venute dal Sennaar 
per conto del Governo Egiziano. 

_E -verissimo che l’Egitto appartiene all’Impero Ottomano, perd 
Mehemet Ali vi commanda despoticamente. 

Anche qui abbiamo dei giornalieri attachi di peste, e la mortalita 
totale si raggira dai 50 4 60 a’lgiorno, sopra i quali si deve contare 15 a 
20 di peste; cio nonostante nessuna precauzione sanitaria abbiamo fin 
qui preso, mentre si spera che il miasma non avra forza per obbligarci 
ad una rinserra. 

Cairo, li 19 Marzo, 1841. 


(Translation.) 


A fresh army of sixty thousand men is now raising, and_ several 
regiments of foot and horse have already been ordered to march into 
Lower Egypt. Even the medical instructors and European pharmacists 
have been called into active service. 

It appears that our citadel is about to be fortified, and that the admi- 
nistrations are to fix their residence in it. 

There was an intention of collecting the “ Ferdé” of 1257, but this 
has been suspended for the present, and only the balances of last year are 
in the course of exaction. | 

Meanwhile the different contracts have been put up at auction, such 
as that of senna, leather, &c., &c. Wine and spirits continue to be 
farmed out as heretofore, and even the six Giraffes that arrived from. 
Sennaar for account of the Egyptian Government have been put up at 
auction, 

Kgypt, doubtless, belongs to the Ottoman Empire, but Mehemet Ali 
commands there despotically. 

_ Here, too, we daily experience attacks of the plague, and the total 
of deaths ranges from fifty to sixty every day, among which from fifteen 
to twenty must be ascribed to the plague. No sanitary precaution has, 
for all that, hitherto been taken, since it is hoped that the miasma will 
not be violent enough to compel us to shut ourselves up from all com- 
munication. 

Cairo, March 19, 1841. , 


No. 241. 
Mr. Bulwer to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received May 3.) 


My Lord, Paris, April 30, 1841. 
IN a few words interchanged between M. Guizot and myself this 
morning, I thought I perceived a disposition to sign the Additional 
Treaty at once, providing the advice given to the Porte included what he 
M. Guizot) considered the reasonable demands of Mehemet Ali. 
3 E 2 


396 © 


« T will not,” he said, “rest assured, submit the conduct of the French 
Government to the caprice or pretensions of the Pasha of Egypt; but I 
must have a moral conviction that the Porte will make him such offers as 
he ought to accept, before I can consider the affair terminated.” 

| I have, &c., | 
(Signed) HENRY L. BULWER. 


( 


No. 242. 
Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston—(Recewed May 3.) 


My Lord, Vienna, April 22, 1841. 


HAVING succeeded in seeing Prince Metternich immediately after 
the arrival of the messenger Johnson, I was enabled to forward to Lord: 
Ponsonby by the same messenger the Prince’s remarks upon your Lord-: 
ship’s despatch to that Ambassador of April 10. I inclose copy of my des- 
patch to Lord Ponsonby, and your Lordship will perceive from it, as well as 
from my despatch of April 14, that the engagement to offer Egypt here- 
ditarily to Mehemet Ali’s family being once fairly acted upon, Prince 
Metternich will be found ready to co-operate fully with your Lordship 
upon all subordinate details. This opinion is borne out by his despatch: 
to the Internuncio, whereof he has had the goodness to furnish me with a 
copy, which I inclose to your Lordship. 

The knot of this affair lies in the acceptance by the Porte of the 
provisions of the Collective Notes signed at London. This being done, it 
is probable that the affair will end; but if it should not, and if Mehemet 
Ali, in face of an offer made in conformity with those Protocols by the 
Porte, should prefer to place himself anew as a rebel, in that case, Prince 
Metternich has assured me repeatedly that Austria will be ready to take 
the position into consideration in concert with her Allies, with the object 
of finding a solution to it. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) BEAUVALE. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 242. 


Lord Beauvale to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Vienna, April 19, 1841. 

HAVING by Lord Palmerston’s orders communicated to Prince 
Metternich copy of his Lordship’s despatch to your Excellency of April 10, 
1 am enabled to transmit along with the origial his Highness’s observa- 
tions thereupon. 

Prince Metternich most positively denied that any proposition had 
been made by the Plenipotentiaries of Austria and Prussia at London, in 
compliance with the wishes of the French Government, and he dissented 
from other points of the historical exposition contained in Lord Palmer- 
ston’s despatch, but he fully admitted the principle therein stated, that the 
premature dissolution of the alliance of the Four Powers would encourage 
Mehemet Ali, and perhaps embolden him to persist in the unreasonable 
part of his pretensions. Upon this consideration, and in the expectation 
that the hereditary tenure will have been conceded to him in the spirit of 
the Collective Notes and of the instructions which have emanated from 
London, Prince Metternich will by this occasion instruct the Internuncio 
to co-operate with your Lordship in order to reduce the remaining differ- 
ences between the Pasha and the Sultan to a reasonable settlement, upon 
the principle of mutual concession laid down by Lord Palmerston in an 
early paragraph of his despatch to your Lordship. | 

In order to give greater weight to your efforts, Prince Metternich 
proposes that if the Consuls have not already sailed for Egypt, their 
departure should be delayed until the Pasha shall have notified ‘his 


397 
acceptance of the modifications which may have been offered to him by 
the Sultan. 

He also proposes that the dissolution of the alliance of the Four 
shall in no case be pronounced at Constantinople, nor intimated to 
Mehemet Ali, but that it shall proceed from the centre of London, and be 
dependent upon the signature of a treaty with France, and simultaneous 
therewith. 

As these instructions to the Internuncio will probably place your 
Excellency in communication with him upon various important points 
treated upon in the answer with which Prince Metternich furnished me to 
Lord Palmerston’s despatch of the 2nd of April, I have the honour to 
inclose a copy of my answer to that despatch. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) BEAUVALE. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 242. 
Prince Metiernich to the Baron de Stiirmer. 


M. le Baron, | Vienne, le 19 Avril, 1841. 


JE profite du passage d’un courier Anglais pour adresser a Votre 
Excellence la présente dépéche. 

Ce courier porte A Lord Ponsonby des directions précises de sa Cour 
sur la conduite qu’il aura a tenir, et ces instructions coincident entiére- 
ment avec celles que je vous ai transmises le 2 de ce mois. Une 
expédition de cet Ambassadeur 4 son Gouvernement en date du 6 Avril, 
et dont Lord Beauvale a bien voulu me donner connaissance, me fait 
admettre comme plus que probable qu’il sera déja entré dans les voies 
que lui prescrivaient les arrétés pris dans le centre de Londres le 5 Mars 
dernier; je me permets d’espérer que je trouverai la confirmation de ce 
changement de marche dans vos premiers Rapports. 

Votre position, M. le Baron, est aujourd’hui fort simplifiée. Comme 
les ordres que je vous ai transmis le 2 Avril, et qui ne faisaient que con- 
firmer ceux quivous ont été adressés antérieurement, coincident avec les 
directions de Londres que recoit aujourd’hui Lord Ponsonby, vous vous 
trouvez placé, ainsi que M. votre Collégue d’ Angleterre, sur la stricte ligne 
des décisions du centre de Londres. M. le Comte de Kénigsmark et 
M. de Titow n’auront de leur cété aucune difficulté a suivre la méme 
direction. Liaffaire est ainsi bien placée sous le point de vue de Vunion 
entre les Représentans des Quatre Cours, et la manifestation de cette 
uniformité suffira sans doute pour faire avancer Je Divan dans la seule 
ligne qui puisse lui paraitre utile. 

La dépéche de Lord Palmerston 4 Lord Ponsonby dont le présent 
courier est le porteur, renferme une remarque d’une valeur incontestable ; 
e’est celle qui fait ressortir les graves inconvéniens qui résulteraient si 
Méhémet Ali se pénétrait de Pidée, que les Quatre Cours, faute d’accord 
entre elles, refuseraient leur appui au Sultan. Cette remarque qui nous 
a toujours été présente dans le cours des derniers tems, nous fait attacher 
une valeur toute particuli¢ére 4 ce que Vunion des Cabinets se fasse 
clairement apercevoir dans celle de leurs organes 4 Constantinople. 
Comme il faut une base pour l’union, et que les arrétés pris 4 Londres 
offrent cette base, vous n’aurez pas de peine a régler votre marche dans 
un sens conforme au but que nous tenons tous en vue, et qu'il s’agit 
d’atteindre par tous les moyens qui sont encore possibles. Le 5 Mars 
on croyait 4 Londres que Vaffaire était finie. Cette conviction était 
fondée sur la persuasion que la Note Collective du 30 Janvier aurait 
servi de norme aux explications des Représentans des Quatre Cours 

envers le Divan. C’est par suite de cette supposition que le renvoi 
~ immédiat des Consuls 4 Alexandrie avait été arrété dans le centre. Je 
me permets d’admettre comme probable, qu’A Constantinople on aura 
trouvé prématuré le retour de ces agens en Egypte, et si tel devait en 
effet avoir été le cas, nous le regarderions comme un bonheur. 


398 


Rien ne saurait prouver mieux 4 Méhémet Ali que les Quatre Cours 
se maintiennent dans une attitude de solidarité morale utile 4 la Porte 
que la suspension du retour des Consuls 4 Alexandrie jusqu’au moment 
oti sa soumission 4 son souverain sera complétée, et elle ne le sera que 
quand elle aura eu lieu non en paroles mais de fait. Le moment de 
prouver cette soumission par le fait arrivera pour Méhémet Ali aprés la 
réponse que la Porte fera 4 ses représentations ; et comme cette réponse 
aura lieu maintenant en accord avec la pensée des Quatre Cours, il 
faudra bien que Méhémet Ali se soumette, 4 moins de prendre de nouveau 
Vattitude d’un rebelle. | | 

Il aurait sans doute été désirable que la Porte n’eut point été dans le 
cas de revenir sur quelques unes des dispositions du firman d’investiture, 
et que celui-ci eut été concu de prime abord dans un esprit plus analogue 
aux vues des Cours; toutefois, cette circonstance, quelque regrettable 
qu’elle soit, ne change rien au fait; ce qu'il importe a notre avis, ce sera: 

1°. De faire bien comprendre et admettre par le Divan la nuance que 
Lord Ponsonby tient trés-sagement en vue, d’éviter avec soin que la 
Porte ne motive ce qu’il accordera 4 Méhémet Ali comme une concession 
que Sa Hautesse ferait 4 la demande de ce Pacha, mais comme une 
marque de déférence aux conseils de ses Alliés. 

2°. Que les Consuls ne retournent pas a Alexandrie avant que 
Méhémet Ali n’ait confirmé par sa soumission de fait aux arrétés défini- 
tivement pris par Sa Hautesse, les belles paroles qu’il lui coaite si peu de 
donner. | 

Je vous prie, M. le Baron, de vous entendre sur ces nuances, en 
autant que le besoin pourra encore exister, avec Lord Ponsonby, MM. le 
Comte de Koénigsmark et de Titow, et de soutenir avec énergie prés du 
Divan la marche dont vous serez convenu avec MM. vos Collégues. 

Recevez, &c., 
(Signé). METTERNICH. 


(Translation.) 


M. le Baron, Vienna, April 19, 1841. 


I TAKE the advantage of the passage of an English messenger to 
address to your Excellency the present despatch. . 

This messenger conveys to Lord Ponsonby precise directions from 
his Court on the conduct which he will have to observe, and these instruc- 
tions coincide entirely with those which I forwarded to you on the 2nd of 
this month. A communication from that Ambassador to his Government, 
dated the 6th of April, and which Lord Beauvale has had the goodness to 
communicate to me, makes me consider as more than probable that he 
will have already adopted the course prescribed to him by the decisions 
taken in the centre of London on the 5th of March last; I allow myself to 
hope that I shall find the confirmation of this alteration of conduct in your 
first reports. 

Your, position, M. le Baron, is at present much simplified. As the 
orders which I sent you on the 2nd of April, and which merely confirmed 
those previously addressed to you, coincide with the instructions from 
London which Lord Ponsonby now receives, you, as likewise your English 
colleague, are placed on the strict line of the decisions of the centre of 
London. Count Kénigsmark and M. de Titow will, on their part, have 
no difficulty in following the same course. The affair is thus correctly 
placed as regards union between the Representatives of the Four Courts, 
and the manifestation of this uniformity will doubtless suffice to cause the 
Divan to proceed in the only line which can appear advantageous to it. 

Lord Palmerston’s despatch to Lord Ponsonby, of which the present 
messenger is the bearer, contains an observation of indisputable value ; it 
is that which points out. the serious inconveniences which would result 
from Mehemet Ali persuading himself that the Four Courts, from want of 
union among themselves, would refuse their support to the Sultan. This 
observation, which has continually occurred to us of late, make us attach 


399 


an especial value to the union of the Cabinets being made clearly manifest 
in that of their organs at Constantinople. As a basis is requisite for 
union, and as the decisions taken at London offer such a basis, you will 
have no difficulty in regulating your proceedings in conformity with the 
object which we have all in view, and which it is now the question to 
attain by all the means which are still possible. On the 5th of March it 
was thought, at London, that the affair was at an end. This conviction 
rested on the persuasion that the Collective Note of the 30th of January 
would have served as a rule for the discussions of the Representatives of 
the Four Courts with the Divan. As a consequence of this supposition, 
the immediate return of the Consuls to Alexandria had been determined 
upon in the centre. I allow myself to consider as probable that the return 
of these agents to Egypt will have been considered at Constantinople as 
premature, and if such indeed should have been the case, we should look 
‘upon it as a fortunate event. 

Nothing can better prove to Mehemet Ali that the Four Courts keep 

themselves in a position of moral consistency useful to the Porte than the 
delay of the return of the Consuls to Alexandria until his submission to 
his Sovereign shall be completed, and it will only be so when it shall take 
place, not in words, but in deeds. The time for Mehemet Ali proving this 
submission by deeds, will be after the answer which the Porte shall make 
to his representations; and as this answer will now be in accordance with 
the opinion of the Four Courts, Mehemet Ali must submit, unless he again 
assumes the attitude of a rebel. 
. It would doubtless have been desirable that the Porte should not have 
been called upon to retract some of the dispositions of the Firman of 
Investiture, and that the Firman should in the first instance have been 
devised in a spirit more in conformity with the views of the Courts: still 
this circumstance, however to be regretted, makes no alteration in the 
fact; that which in our opinion is of consequence, will be,— 

1. To make the Divan clearly understand and admit the distinction 
which Lord Ponsonby very wisely keeps in view, of carefully avoiding that 
the Porte should designate what it shall grant to Mehemet Ali, as a con- 
cession made by His Highness to the demands of that Pasha, but as a 
mark of deference to the advice of his Allies. 

2. That the Consuls should not return to Alexandria before Mehemet 
Ali shall have confirmed by his actual submission to the decisions finally 
adopted by His Highness, the fair words which it costs him so little to 

ive. 
; I request you, M. le Baron, as far as it is still necessary, to come to 
an understanding, with respect to these distinctions, with Lord Ponsonby, 
Count Kénigsmark, and M. de Titow, and to support with energy, as 
regards the Divan, the course upon which you shall have agreed with your 
Colleagues. . 
Receive, &c., 
(Signed) METTERNICH. 


No. 243. 
Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received May 3.) 


My Lord, | Vienna, April 22, 1841. 
; PRINCE METTERNICH is anxious for the close of the Turco- 
Egyptian affair upon the conditions established in the centre of London; 
but he looks for this close at Constantinople, and holds it idle to seek for 
it elsewhere. According to him, “ this affair being once closed, the second 
affair, which may be termed the isolation of France, will cease of itself, 
and her signature to the Convention will serve to mark that she has re- 
united herself to the rest of Europe; but this signature cannot put an 
end to the Turco-Egyptian affair, and will therefore be valueless if it pre- 
cede instead of following its close.” 

The Prince is of opinion that the real moment for France to affix her 


400 


signature to the Convention will be when we shall learn that an offer of 
hereditary tenure in conformity with the provisions of the Collective 
Notes to Chekib Effendi has been made by the Porte to Mehemet Ali. 
This condition being fulfilled, the Prince thinks it would be a mistake in 
the French Government to await the acceptance of the offer by the 
Pasha. It cannot be for. the interest or dignity of France to make her 
conduct dependent upon the will of Mehemet Ali, and if she did so, it 
could not fail to encourage him in his pretensions, and might thereby 
retard or entirely impede a conclusion. If, on the contrary, she sign upon 
the fact of a reasonable offer being made to him, this decision on her part 
will have a salutary effect on the settlement of the remaining details of 
the affair. 
I have, &c., ' 
(Signed) BEAUVALE. 


2 ined 


No. 244. 
Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received May 3.) 


My Lord, Vienna, April 22, 1841. 


PRINCE METTERNICH has been informed that the Porte has sent 
orders to Chekib Effendi to demand anew the guarantee of the Four 
Powers for the Ottoman Empire. The same demand is to be addressed to 
France. Prince Metternich has no doubt that it will be answered by a 
refusal, but he has entered into a reasoning to demonstrate the absurdity 
of the notion to the Porte. In the same despatch he enters into an exa- 
mination of the question of the tribute to be paid by Mehemet Ali, and 
expresses opinions as to the collection of the imposts in various parts of 
the Ottoman Empire which merit your Lordship’s attention. The Prince 
having furnished me with an extract from his despatch to the Internuncio, 
I have the honour to inclose copy of it. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) BEAUVALE, 


Inclosure in No. 244. 
Extract of a Despatch from Prince Metternich to the Baron de Sturmer. 


Vienne, le 20 Avril, 1841. 


LE Divan vient de concevoir une bien malheureuse idée en expri- 
mant le voeu de placer l’Empire Ottoman sous la garantie des Grandes 
Puissances Européennes. Cette idée, qui est fausse dans son point de 
départ, est a la fois moralement et matériellement inexécutable. L’idée 
est fausse parcequ’un Etat ne doit jamais accepter, et dés lors bien moins 
encore demander a d’autres Etats, un service pour lequel il ne saurait 
offrir en retour une stricte réciprocité. Dans les circonstances ou il en 
est autrement, I’Ktat qui accepte la faveur perd par le fait la fleur de son 
indépendance. Un Etat placé sous une garantie devient un Etat média~- 
tisé; car pour qu’une garantie puisse étre accordée il faut que Etat qui 
la réclame fasse un acte de soumission aux volontés de ’Etat qui aura la 
charge de la défendre. Le garant, pour étre quelque chose, doit assumer 
la charge d’un protecteur, et si un protecteur est pour le moins incom- 
mode, plusieurs protecteurs deviennent une charge insoutenable. [1 n’y 
a qu'une forme connue pour atteindre le but de la garantie et cependant 
éviter les inconvéniens de la chose; cette forme est celle de Valliance 
défensive. Or, est-ce li ce que veut le Divan? Ce sera a lui a le pro- 
poser ; mais je ne crois pas qu’il trouvera une issue A sa proposition. 

Les détails sur le tribut dans lesquels vous étes entré, M. le Baron, 
dans lune de vos dépéches du 7 Avril, ne me prouvent autre chose, sinon 
que le tribut devrait étre énoncé dans un chiffre. Ce n’est pas moi qui al 
la prétention de le fixer ; mais ce qui est certain c’est que tout autre mode 


401 


de perception réduirait & zero le revenu de ’Egypte, et ouvrirait la porte 
a des discussions sans fin, et A des mécomptes inévitables. La différence 
entre la valeur intrinséque de la monnaie pourra étre réglée au moyen 
d’un arrangement qui reposerait sur un chiffre fixe, et ce chiffre pourrait 
étre élevé ou diminué a des époques déterminées. 

Si tout ne me trompe, la Porte devra abandonner dans la majeure 
partie de ses domaines le mode de perception nouvellement introduit dans 
plusieurs d’entre elles. En faisant percevoir les impéts par ses propres 
receveurs, elle n’aura fait qu’augmenter les exactions pour ses sujets et 
les non-valeurs pour son trésor. L’abonnement fixe, fondé sur une loi 
tutélaire pour les contribuables, me semble le seul mode de perception 
possible dans Empire Ottoman. Les ineptes novateurs dans cet Empire 
ont cru qu'il suffisait d’emprunter des formes et des noms 4 la civilisation 
Chrétienne pour s’assurer les mémes effets. Ils ne les obtiendront pas, et 
retomberont dans les usages d’un passé qw’ils auront contribué A détruire. 


(Translation.) 


Vienna, April 20, 1841. 


THE Divan has just conceived a very unfortunate notion, in express- 
ing the wish to place the Ottoman Empire under the guarantee of the 
Great European Powers. This notion, which is erroneous at its very 
outset, is at once morally and materially impracticable. The notion is 
erroneous because a State ought never to accept, and therefore still much 
less request, of other States a service for which it is unable to offer in 
return a strict reciprocity. In the circumstances where it is otherwise, 
the State which accepts the favour, loses by so doing the bloom of its 
independence. A State placed under a guarantee becomes a mediatised 
State ; for, in order that a guarantee may be given, it is requisite that 
the State which applies for it should. make an act of submission to the 
will of the State which will have the charge of its defence. The guarantee- 
ing State, to be of any use, must assume the office of a protector; and if 
one protector is, to say the least of it, inconvenient, many protectors 
become an insupportable burden. There is only one known form of 
attaining the object of the guarantee, and still avoiding the inconvenience 
of the thing; that form is a defensive alliance: now, is that what the 
Divan wants? It will be for it to propose such a thing; but I do not 
think that it will find a result to its proposition. 

The details respecting the tribute into which, M. le Baron, you have 
entered in one of your despatches of the 7th of April, prove to me nothing 
else, but that the tribute should be stated in one sum. I have no preten- 
sion to fix that sum, but what is certain is that every other mode of 
receipt would reduce the revenue of Egypt to nothing, and would open a 
door to interminable discussions, and to inevitable mistakes. The differ- 
ence between the intrinsic value of the coin can be settled by means of an 
arrangement which should rest on a fixed sum, and that sum might be 
augmented or diminished at stated periods. 

If I am not altogether deceived, the Porte will have to abandon in the 
greater part of its dominions the mode of receipt recently introduced into 
several of them. By causing the duties to be collected by its own 
receivers, it will only have augmented the exactions as far as its, subjects 
are concerned, and the deficiency as far as its treasury is concerned. The 
stated payment, which resis upon a law salutary as regards those who 
are called upon to pay, appears to me to be the only practicable mode of 
receipt in the Ottoman Empire. The silly innovators in that Empire have 
thought that it was enough to borrow forms and names from Christian 
civilization, in order to secure the same results. They will not obtain 
them, and they will relapse into the usages of past times which they will 


have assisted in destroying. 


PS a a a aa aa RRR Di 


3 F 


402° 


No. 245. 


Viscount Palmerston to Lord Beauvale. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, May 4, 1841. 
WITH reference to your Excellency’s despatch of the 14th ultimo, 
reporting Prince Metternich’s views about the rule of succession in 
Egypt, and the tribute to be paid by Mehemet Ali to the Sultan, I have 
to inform your Excellency that Her Majesty’s Government consider those 
views to be sound and practical. : re 
am 


4 ? C., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 246. 
Viscount Palmerston to Lord Beauvale. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, May 8, 1841. 


I HAVE received your Excellency’s despatch of the 22nd ultimo, 
reporting that Prince Metternich had repeatedly assured you that if 
Mehemet. Ali, instead of accepting an offer made to him by the Sultan, 
in conformity with the recommendations of the Four Powers, should place 
himself anew in rebellion towards the Porte, Austria would in such case 
be ready to take the matter into consideration, in concert with her Allies, 
for the purpose of coming to some arrangement. | have to instruct your 
Excellency to express to Prince Metternich the satisfaction of Her Ma- 
jesty’s Government at this declaration. 

I am, &ce. 


(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 247. 
Viscount jet ees to Lord Beauvale. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, May 10, 1841. 

WITH reference to your Excellency’s despatch of the 22nd ultimo, 
reporting Prince Metternich’s opinion as to the moment at which it 
would be most expedient that France should affix her signature to the 
Convention, the draft of which was initialed on the 15th of March, I have 
to state to your Excellency, that Her Majesty’s Government have felt 
great pleasure in learning the very sound and judicious view taken by 
Prince Metternich of the matters treated of in that despatch. It is per- 
fectly true, as his Highness observes, that the isolation of France can 
only cease when that Treaty, in the execution of which the Four Powers 
are engaged, and to which France is not a party, shall have been fully 
carried into effect; for the isolation of France arises from the fact that 
the Four Powers have undertaken a political operation which France 
declined to take part in; and when that operation is finished, and the 
Four Powers fall back into the ordinary state of quiescence in which all 
Powers are when they are not actively engaged in any combined measures 
with Allies, then the Four Powers and France will all be equally isolated ; 
and this is a distinction which seems to have been either overlooked or 
not understood in France. 

The French think that the isolation of France will cease by the 
signature of the proposed Treaty, and that this Treaty will make France 
enter again into “ the European concert ;” but the proposed Treaty con- 


tains no stipulations for action or for concert ; it merely records the deter- 
mination of the Great Powers to respect the decision and intention of the 
Sultan in a matter with regard to which he is entitled, as an independent 
Sovereign, to declare his will. 


I am, &c., 

(Signed) PALMERSTON. 
ee ee 
No. 248. 

Viscount Palmerston to Lord Beauvale. 
(Extract.) Foreign Office, May 10, 1841. 


WITH reference to your Excellency’s despatch of the 22nd 
ultimo, reporting Prince Metternich’s opinion that it would not, in the 
present state of things, be expedient for the Powers of Europe to enter 
into a guarantee of the integrity of the Turkish Empire, I have to inform 
your Excellency that Her Majesty’s Government entirely agree with 
Prince Metternich in that opmion. But Her Majesty’s Government 
do not perhaps entirely concur with Prince Metternich in the reasons 
which, in his despatch to Baron Stiirmer, he gives for that opinion. 

Prince Metternich argues, that a State which is guaranteed loses 
thereby its independence, and becomes a mediatized State; that the 
guaranteeing Power becomes a protecting Power; and that, while it is 
inconvenient to have even one protector, to have several would be an 
intolerable burthen; that in fact there is but one form of guarantee free _ 
from these inconveniences, and that is a defensive alliance. 

Now Her Majesty’s Government quite admit that when a single 
Power guarantees another, such an engagement does place the weaker 
Power in a situation of dependence upon the stronger, which must dero- 
gate from the freedom of action, and from the entire independence of the 
weaker Power, and must give the stronger one a preponderant influence. 
But this effect will not be produced in the same degree when the guarantee 
is given by several Powers; because it is probable that those Powers 
would have different views and wishes; and these opposite and _con- 
flicting impulses would destroy each other. 

- At all events, Austria has not always held these opinions; because 
she joined with the other Four Powers in guaranteeing, not merely the 
integrity, but the independence of Belgium; proving thereby, that she did 
not consider a guarantee of integrity as being necessarily destructive of 
independence ; and the result, in the case of Belgium, has not shown that 
the guarantee has deprived Belgium of any portion of her independence. 

Again, France, Great Britain, and Russia, guaranteed the integrity 
and independence of the kingdom of Greece; and although foreign 
influence has, during the reign of King Otho, exerted a most injurious 
sway in Greece, yet this evil has not arisen out of the guarantee. 

The evil of a guarantee to the State to which it is given is, that it 
leads such State to rely upon foreign aid for its defence; and then, when 
the moment comes when that aid is wanted, it may, upon some pretence or 
other, be withheld, or it may arrive too late. 

In the present case of Turkey, if the status quo of 1839 had been 
maintained, and if Mehemet Ali had been left in occupation of Syria, the 
Sultan would have been constantly exposed to an imminent and serious 
danger, and there might have been a reason why the Four Powers should 
have entered into engagements to come to his assistance against Mehemet 
Ali whenever wanted ; but now that Mehemet has been driven back into 
Egypt, and the Sultan has recovered possession of Syria and of his fleet, 
and may by good management and perseverance make himself stronger 
by sea and by land than Mehemet Ali can possibly be, there seems to be 
no standing danger against which it can be necessary for the Allies to 
guarantee the Sultan; and therefore it would, on many accounts, be 
better that Turkey and the other Powers of Europe should stand towards 
each other in the ordinary relation in which independent States recipro- 
cally stand. 


a 


3 F 2 


404 


No. 249. 


Note from the Plenipotentiaries of Austria, Great Britain, Prussia, and Russia, to 
Chekib Effendi. 


Londres, le 10 Mai, 1841. 


LES Soussignés, Plénipotentiaires des Cours d’Autriche, de la Grande 
Bretagne, de Prusse, et de Russie, ont eu l’honneur de recevoir la Note 
en date du 27 d’Avril, par laquelle son Excellence Chékib Effendi, Ambas- 
sadeur de Ja Sublime Porte, en leur communiquant les instructions dont 
il vient d’étre muni, a bien voulu en appeler au concours des Puissances 
Alliées, afin d’applanir les difficultés qui se sont élevées relativement a 
Vinterprétation de quelques unes des dispositions contenues dans les 
firmans émanés le 13 Février dernier au sujet de arrangement définitif 
des affaires d’Egypte. 

Les dispositions a l’égard desquelles la Sublime Porte a désiré con- 
naitre l’avis des Quatre Cours Alliées, se réduisent nommément aux trois 
points suivans :— 

1°. La question de Phérédité. 

2°. La fixation du tribut. 

3°. Les promotions militaires. 

Les régles générales qui servent 4 résoudre ces trois questions ont été 
déterminées en principe par la Convention que la Sublime Porte a conclue 
le 15 Juillet, 1840, avec les Cours d’Autriche, de la Grande Bretagne, de 
Prusse, et de Russie. 

C’est done aux principes posés par cette transaction que les Sous- 
signés ont cru devoir se référer dans les communications qu’ils ont eu 
Vhonneur d’adresser successivement a M. Ambassadeur Ottoman, nommé- 
ment dans leurs Notes du 30 Janvier, et du 13 Mars. En se fondant sur 
la méme base, les Soussignés, pour répondre au désir exprimé par son 
Excellence Chékib Effendi, s’empressent de lui offrir les éclaircissemens 
suivans. 


1°. La Question de l Héerediteé. 


LE Sultan, en réalisant lintention que Sa Hautesse avait manifesté 
dés lorigine de la crise du Levant, a formellement annoncé la détermi- 
nation de conserver héréditairement l’administration du Pachalic d’ Egypte 
dans la famille de Mehemet Ahi, tant que lui et ses descendans se rendront 
dignes de cette faveur, en remplissant fidélement les conditions qui y sont 
attachées. 

Ce principe, une fois legalement posé par l’autorité souveraine du 
Sultan, il ne reste qu’a régler le mode d’aprés lequel le poste de Gou- 
verneur d’EKgypte sera transmise d’un membre de la famille de Méhémet 
Ali a Pautre. 

Or, il a été établi que cette transmission se fera au moyen de l’inves- 
titure que le Sultan accordera au nouveau titulaire. ? 

C’est d’accord avec ce principe, que Sa Hautesse, en réintégrant 
Méhémet Ali dans les fonctions de Gouverneur d’Egypte, a daigné lui 
adresser le firman du 13 Février. 

De plus, par une disposition spéciale que le Sultan a cru devoir com- 
muniquer a ses Alliés, ce souverain a dispensé Méhémet Ali de se rendre a 
Constantinople pour recevoir dans cette capitale l’investiture de son 
Pachalic. 

En méme tems, Sa Hautesse a daigné déclarer qu’elle dispensait 
également Ibrahim Pacha de se rendre 4 Constantinople, lorsqu’il serait 
appelé 4 remplacer Méhémet Ali dans les fonctions de Pacha; et que le 
firman d'investiture lui serait alors envoyé en Egypte. 

Kn adoptant cette disposition, telle qu’elle a été communiquée aux 
Cours Alliées, la Sublime Porte a indiqué elle-méme le mode d’aprés 
lequel Sa Hautesse se proposait de pourvoir 4 administration du Pachalic 
d’Kgypte héréditairement dans la famille de Méhémet Ali 


405 


D’aprés ce mode, et conformément aux usages établis dans l’Empire 
Ottoman, c’est donc Ibrahim Pacha qui, a titre de plus Agé dans la famille, 
se trouve éventuellement appelé a succéder 4 Méhémet Ali dans le poste 
de Gouverneur d’Egypte. | 

_ En vertu de la méme régle, le plus Agé de la famille aprés Ibrahim 
Pacha sera considéré comme destiné 4 remplacer Ibrahim dans la charge 
de Gouverneur du Pachalic d’Egypte. 

Telle est la régle générale que les Plénipotentiaires des Cours Alliées 
regardent comme la mieux adaptée aux intéréts de la Sublime Porte et la 
plus analogue aux usages établis dans Empire Ottoman. 

En répondant ainsi a lappel que M. l’Ambassadeur Ottoman vient 
de leur adresser, d’ordre de son Gouvernement, ils ont cru devoir constater 
que la nomination au poste de Gouverneur d'Egypte appartient exclu- 
sivement 4 Sa Hautesse; que ce droit s’exerce et se manifeste chaque fois 
par l’imvestiture conférée au nouveau titulaire; enfin, que cette investi- 
ture, accordée par l’autorité Souveraine, constitue le titre en vertu duquel 
chaque nouveau Gouverneur sera appelé a administrer Egypte au nom 
de Sa Hautesse comme une province fesant partie intégrante de l’Empire 
Ottoman. 


2°. Fixation du Tribut. 


L’Acte Séparé annexé a la Convention du 15 Juillet, n’a point statué 
sur la quotité du tribut. 

Il] a posé seulement en principe: 

Que le tribut serait payé annuellement a la Porte; 

Quill serait proportionné a létendue du territoire dont l’administra- 
tion serait confiée 4 Méhémet Ali; 

Qu’a condition du payement régulier du tribut, le Pacha d’Egypte 
percevrait, au nom du Sultan et comme délégué de Sa Hautesse, les taxes 
et impots légalement établis; . 

Knfin, que moyennant la perception de ces impots, le Pacha d’Egypte 
pourvoira 4 toutes les dépenses de administration civile et militaire du 
dit Pachalic. 

Kn rappelant ici ces dispositions établies en principe par la Conven- 
tion du 15 Juillet, les Plénipotentiaires des Cours Signataires de cette 
transaction croiraient dépasser les limites de leurs attributions s’ils émet- 
taient une opinion décisive sur le montant du tribut—question financiére 
relative 4 administration intérieure de |’Hmpire Ottoman, que les Sous- 
signés, ainsi quils Vont déja exprimé dans leur Note du 13 Mars, ne 
regardent point comme étant de leur ressort. 

De plus, ne possédant pas les données statistiques nécessaires pour 
servir de base 4 un jugement solide sur les ressources financiéres de 
VEgypte, ils ne sauraient prononcer aucun avis sur la quotité du revenu 
annuel que le trésor de la Sublime Porte peut retirer de cette province. 

Néanmoins, pour satisfaire, autant qu’il est en leur pouvoir, au voeu 
exprimé par son Excellence Chékib Effendi au nom de la Sublime Porte, 
ils croient devoir émettre lidée, qu’au lieu d’affecter au tribut 4 payer par 
le Pacha, une partie proportionnelle du revenu brut de l’Egypte, il serait 
préférable, dans l’intérét bien-entendu de !a Porte, de déterminer le chiffre 
du tribut par une somme fixe; ce qui assurerait au trésor de Sa Hautesse 
une recette positive. Toutefois, vu que les bases d’aprés lesquelles le 
montant de cette somme serait déterminé, pourraient étre sujettes a 
varier par la suite du tems, il serait peut-étre utile que le montant 
nominal de la dite somme fat soumis a révision a l’expiration de certaines 


époques. 
3°. Promotions Militaires. 


Le paragraphe 6 de l’Acte Séparé de la Convention du 15 Juillet 
porte, que les forces de terre et de mer que pourra entretenir le Pacha 
d’Egypte, fesant partie des forces de l’Empire Ottoman, seront toujours 
considérées comme entretenues pour le service de |’Etat. 


‘ 


406 


D’aprés ce principe, les forces militaires employées en Egypte étant 
celles de Sa Hautesse le Sultan, les officiers de terre et de mer n’obtien- 
dront leur avancement qu’en vertu de l’autorité seule du Souverain a 
qui appartiennent l’armée et la flotte Ottomanes.. 

En partant de ce principe, qui est d’une application générale, les 
Soussignés ne sauraient attacher qu’une importance secondaire a la diffi- 
culté qui s’est élevée relativement ata question des promotions militaires 
en Egypte. C’est au Sultan qu'il appartient de déléguer 4 cet égard les 
pouvoirs qu'il jugera nécessaire de confier aux Gouverneurs d’EKgypte, en 
se réservant d’étendre ou de restreindre ces pouvoirs selon que l’expérience 
et les besoins du service pourront en démontrer l’opportunité. 


Si dans la présente Note les Soussignés ont cru devoir borner leurs 
observations aux trois points ci-dessus mentionnés, c’est que par leurs 
Notes Collectives du 30 Janvier, dul3 Mars, et par le Protocole du 5 Mars, 
ils ont-déja prononcé leur jugement quant aux autres conditions renfer- 
mées dans l’Acte Séparé annexé a la Convention du 15 Juillet, 1840. 

Persévérant dans les vues et opinions qu ils ont manifestées par les dits 
Actes, les Soussignés croient devoir s’y référer. Ils ne peuvent considérer 
la soumission formellement faite par Méhémet Ali que comme absolue; et 
par conséquent la Question Turco-Egyptienne comme terminée. 

Dés lors les Soussignés ne sauraient admettre la supposition, que ce 
Pacha, en reconnaissance du pardon que le Sultan a daigné lui accorder, 
et des faveurs que Sa Hautesse lui a conférées ainsi qu’a sa famille, ne se 
maintienne dans les bornes de l’obéissance et de la soumission qui sont 
les conditions de ce pardon et de ces faveurs. 

Les Plénipotentiaires des Cours d’Autriche, de la Grande Bretagne, 
de Prusse, et de Russie, en communiquant ces observations a son Excel- 
lence Chékib Effendi, Pinvitent 4 vouloir bien les porter a la connaissance 
de sa Cour, comme devant servir de complément au contenu de leur Note 
Collective du 13 Mars dernier. 

Les Soussignés, &c., 
(Signé) ESTERHAZY. NEUMANN. 
PALMERSTON. 
BULOW. 
BRUNNOW. 


(Translation.) 


London, May 10, 1841. 


The Undersigned, Plenipotentiaries of the Courts of Austria, Great 
Britain, Prussia, and Russia, have had the honour to receive the note 
dated the 27th of April, by which his Excellency Chekib Effendi, Ambas- 
sador of the Sublime Porte, on communicating to them the instructions 
with which he has just been furnished, has been pleased to appeal to the 
concurrence of the Allied Powers, in order to smooth away the difficulties 
which have arisen relative to the interpretation of some of the provisions 
contained in the firmans published on the 13th of February last, on the 
subject of the definitive arrangement of the affairs of Egypt. 

The provisions, in regard to which the Sublime Porte has desired to 
know the opinion of the Four Allied Courts, resolve themselves into the 
three following points:— 

1°. The question of hereditary succession. 

2°. The settlement of the tribute. 

3°. The military promotions. 

The general rules which serve to solve these three questions were 
determined in principle by the Convention which the Sublime Porte con- 
cluded on the 15th of July, 1840, with the Courts of Austria, Great 
Britain, Prussia, and Russia. 

It is to the principles, therefore, which were laid down in that Act, 
that the Undersigned have deemed it to be their duty to refer in the com- 
munications which they have had the honour successively to address to 
the Ottoman Ambassador, specifically in their notes of the 30th of J anuary 


407 


and of the 13th of March. Resting on the sae basis, the Undersigned, 
in order to comply with the wish expressed by his Excellency Chekib 
Effendi, hasten to offer to him the following explanations. 


1°. The Question of Hereditary Succession. 


The Sultan, in carrying into effect the intention which His Highness 
had manifested from the commencement of the crisis in the Levant, has 
formally announced his determination to maintain hereditarily the admi- 
nistration of the Pashalic of Egypt in the family of Mehemet Ali, 
so long as he and his descendants shall render themselves worthy of that 
favour by faithfully fulfilling the conditions which are attached to it. 

This principle, once lawfully laid down by the sovereign authority of 
the Sultan, it only remains to settle the manner in which the post of 
Governor of Egypt shall be transmitted from one member of the family of 
Mehemet Ali to the other. 

Now, it has been laid down that this transmission shall be effected 
by means of the investiture which the Sultan shall grant to the new 
incumbent. 

In conformity with this principle, His Highness, in reinstating 
Mehemet Ali in his functions as Governor of Egypt, has been pleased 
to address to him the firman of the 13th of February. 

Moreover, by a special disposition which the Sultan has thought fit 
to communicate to his Allies, that Sovereign has relieved Mehemet Ali 
from proceeding to Constantinople to receive in that capital the investiture 
of his Pashalic. 

At the same time, His Highness has been pleased to declare that he 
equally relieved Ibrahim Pasha from coming to Constantinople, when he 
should be called upon to replace Mehemet Ali in the functions of Pasha; 
ae that the firman of investiture should at that time be sent to him in 

gypt. . 

By adopting this arrangement, such as it has been communicated to 
the Allied Courts, the Sublime Porte has itself indicated the mode in which 
His Highness proposed to provide for the administration of the Pashalic 
of Egypt hereditarily in the family of Mehemet Ali. 

According, then, to that mode, and in conformity with the usages 
established in the Ottoman Empire, it is [brahim Pasha, who, as the 
eldest of the family, is eventually called upon to succeed Mehemet Ali in 
the post of Governor of Egypt. 

In pursuance of the same rule, the eldest of the family after Ibrahim 
Pasha will be considered as destined to replace Ibrahim in the office of 
Governor of the Pashalic of Egypt. ) 

Such is the general rule which the Plenipotentiaries of the Allied 
Courts consider to be best adapted to the interests of the Sublime Porte, 
and the most analogous to the usages established in the Ottoman Empire. 

In thus replying to the appeal which the Ottoman Ambassador has 
just addressed to them, by order of his Government, they have deemed it 
to be their duty to record that the nomination to the post of Governor of 
Egypt belongs exclusively to His Highness; that this right is exercised 
and made. manifest on each occasion by the investiture conferred on the 
new incumbent; finally, that this investiture, granted by the authority of 
the Sovereign, constitutes the title in virtue of which each new Governor 
will be called upon to administer Egypt, in the name of His Highness, as 
a province forming an integral portion of the Ottoman Empire. 


2°. The settlement of the tribute. 


The Separate Act annexed to the Convention of the 15th of July, has 
not determined the amount of the tribute. 

It has only laid down in principle: 

That the tribute should be annually paid to the Porte; 

That it should be proportioned to the extent of the territory of 
which the administration should be confided to Mehemet Ali; 


408 


That, on condition that the tribute is regularly paid, the Pasha of 
Egypt should receive, in the name of the Sultan, and as the delegate of 
His Highness, the taxes and duties lawfully established aH A 

Finally, that in consideration of the receipt of these duties, the Pasha 
of Egypt shall provide for all the expenses of the civil and military 
administration of the said Pashalic. BAG! 

In thus reciting these arrangements, which are in principle laid down 
by the Convention of the 15th of July, the Plenipotentiaries of the Courts 
parties to that Act would consider that they outstepped the limits of 
their functions if they were to.express a decisive opinion as to the amount 
of the tribute—a question of finance relating to the internal administration 
of the Ottoman Empire, which the Undersigned, as they have already 
stated in their note of the 13th of March, do not consider to be within 
their province. nae 

Moreover, as they do not possess the necessary statistical data to 
serve as a basis for an accurate opinion as to the financial resources of 
Egypt, they cannot pronounce any opinion as to the amount of annual 
revenue which the treasury of the Sublime Porte can derive from that 
province. ; 

Nevertheless, in order as far as possible to comply with the wish 
expressed by his Excellency Chekib Effendi, in the name of the Sublime 
Porte, they deem it their duty to suggest that, instead of assigning as the 
tribute to be paid by the Pasha, a certain proportion of the gross revenue 
of Egypt, it would be preferable, for the real interest of the Porte, to fix 
the amount of the tribute at a stated sum, which would secure a positive 
receipt to the treasury of His Highness. Nevertheless, considering that 
the basis on which the amount of that sum would be settled might in 
process of time be subject to variation, it might perhaps be advantageous 
that the nominal amount of the said sum should be subject to revision at 
the expiration of certain periods. 


3°. The Military Promotions. 


The sixth paragraph of the Separate Act of the Convention of the 
15th of July, states, that the military and naval forces which may be 
maintained by the Pasha of Egypt, forming part of the forces of the 
Ottoman Empire, shall always be considered as maintained for the 
service of the State. 

According to this principle, the military forces employed in Egypt 
being those of His Highness the Sultan, the military and naval officers 
will only obtain their promotion by the sole authority of the Sultan, to 
whom the Ottoman army and fleet belong. 

_ Setting out from this principle, which is one of general application, 
the Undersigned can only attach a secondary importance to the difficulty 
which has arisen with respect to the question of military promotion in 
Egypt. It appertains to the Sultan to delegate in this respect the powers 
which he shall deem it necessary to entrust to the Governors of Egypt, 
reserving to himself to extend or to restrict those powers according as 
experience and the wants of the service shall show the fitness of so doing. 


If in the present note the Undersigned have considered it to be their 
duty to confine their observations to the three points above mentioned, it 
is because they have, by their Collective Notes of the 30th of January, of 
the 13th of March, and by the Protoco] of the 5th of March, already pro- 
nounced their opinion as to the other conditions contained in the Separate 
Act annexed to the Convention of the 15th of July, 1840. 

Persisting in the views and opinions which they manifested in the 
said documents, the Uudersigned deem it their duty to refer thereto. 
They can only look upon the submission formally made by Mehemet 
Ali as absolute, and, consequently, the Turco-Egyptian Question as» 
terminated. 

Henceforward, the Undersigned cannot admit the supposition, that 
this Pasha, in gratitude for the pardon which the Sultan has been pleased 
to grant to him, and for the favours which His Highness has conferred 


409 


upon him, as well as upon his family, will not keep himself within the 
bounds of the obedience and submission which are the conditions of that 
pardon and of those favours. 
. The Plenipotentiaries of the Courts of Austria, Great Britain, 
Prussia, and Russia, in communicating these observations to his Excel- 
Jency Chekib Effendi, request him to have the goodness to bring them to 
the knowledge of his Court as the complement of what is contained in 
their Collective Note of the 13th of March last. 
The Undersigned, &c., | 
(Signed) ESTERHAZY NEUMANN. 

PALMERSTON. 

BULOW. 

BRUNNOW. 


No. 250. 


Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, May 10, 1841. 
IT INCLOSE, for your Excellency’s information, a copy of a Note 
‘which the Plenipotentiaries of the Four Powers have addressed to Chekib 
Effendi, in reply to his communication of the instructions which he had 
received from the Porte, dated the Ist of April, requesting the concurrence 
of the Four Powers in removing the difficulties which have arisen in the 
settlement of the differences between the Porte and Mehemet Ali. 
J am, &c., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


P.S.—I inclose a copy of the Note from Chekib Effendi, in which he 
transmitted to me the instructions from his Court mentioned in this 
despatch. 


No. 251. 
Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, ; | Foreign Office, May 11, 1841. 

I HAVE to instruct your Excellency to state to the Porte, that the 
Collective Note from the Plenipotentiaries of the Four Powers to the 
Turkish Ambassador, of the 10th of May, of which a copy is inclosed in 
my despatch of yesterday, contains the opinion and advice of Her 
Majesty's Government upon the points still remaining unsettled between 
Mehemet Ali and the Sultan. 
The Representatives of the Four Powers cannot admit the supposi- 
tion that Mehemet Ali can seriously mean to retract the full and uncon- 
ditional submission which he made through Captain Fanshawe; and they 
must assume that, when he receives the communication which the Sultan 
will no doubt found upon this Collective Note, he will acquiesce in the 
other conditions of the Separate Act of the Treaty of July. 

Lam, &c., 


(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 252. 
Mr. Bulwer to Viscount Palmersion.—( Received May 10.) 


My Lord, Paris, May 7, 1841. 
THE Count Appony read to me this day a despatch dated 26th 


April, which he had received from his Court, and which he communicated 
yesterday to M. Guizot.. The object of that despatch was to state,— 
3G 


410 


Ist. That Prince Metternich thought it perfectly natural that the 
French Government should decline signing the Additional Convention, 
until the questions arising out of the Treaty of 15th July were termi- 
nated. 

2ndly. That he should consider that those questions were terminated 
when the Porte should adopt the suggestions recently made to it by the 
Four Powers; and that consequently he should expect M. Guizot in such 
case to sign the initialed arrangement without further delay. _ 

M. Guizot said that he should certainly not place his actions under 
the control of Mehemet Ali, nor allow that person’s conduct to dictate his 
own; but that saying thus much he should say no more, but hold himself 
perfectly free to act as he should think proper when he saw the new 
conditions offered by the Sultan. — 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) HENRY L. BULWER. 


No. 253: 
Viscount Palmerston to Lieutenant-Colonel Napier. 


(Extract.) Foreign Office, May 14, 1841. 


I HAVE to instruct you, immediately on the receipt of this despatch, 
to proceed to Alexandria to demand from Mehemet Ali the release of the 
Syrian soldiers, whom he promised Sir Charles Napier to dismiss; and 
you will accompany those soldiers back to Syria. 

I have applied to the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to 
provide you with a passage on board the steam-vessel which conveys the 
mail from Gibraltar to Malta; and the Admiral at Malta will be instructed 
to send you on to Alexandria, and also to make arrangements for con- 
veying the Syrian soldiers, when released by Mehemet Ali, from Egypt to 
the coast of Syria. 

You will report your proceedings in execution of this instruction 
directly to me, and also to Colonel Bridgeman, or the officer commanding 
the British detachments on shore in Syria, to whose orders you will be 
subject while employed on this service; and who will be instructed to 
direct you to return to your regiment when the service is completed. 

I inclose a despatch to Colonel Hodges, directing him to join you in 
demanding from Mehemet Ali the release of these Syrians; and you will 
deliver the same to Colonel Hodges, if he should be at Alexandria, when 
you arrive there. But you will not delay making the demand, if Colonel 
Hodges should not have arrived. 


No. 254. 
Viscount Palmerston to Colonel Hodges. 


Sir, Foreign Office, May 14, 1841. 

I HAVE to acquaint you that Lieutenant-Colonel Napier has been 
instructed to proceed to Alexandria, to demand from Mehemet Ali the 
performance of the promise which Mehemet Ali made to Sir Charles 
Napier, that he would dismiss the Syrian soldiers who accompanied the 
Egyptian army in its retreat from Syria. 

I have to instruct you to join with Lieutenant-Colonel Napier in 
making this demand; and to point out to Mehemet Ali, that any military 
advantage which he may fancy he might gain by retaining these men in 
his service, would be insignificant, compared with the injury he would do 
himself if he were to break faith in this matter with the British Govern- 
ment, by violating an engagement made by him to one of Her.Majesty’s 
officers. , 

Tam, &c., aN 
(Signed) | PALMERSTON. 


a a a 


AIT 


No. 255. 


Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


. My Lord, Foreign Office, May 14, 1841. 

I INCLOSE for your Excellency’s information a copy of. an instruc- 
tion. which I have given to Lieutenant-Colonel Napier, directing him to 
proceed to Alexandria to demand the release of the Syrian soldiers whom 
Mehemet Ali promised Sir Charles Napier to dismiss; and a copy of an 
instruction which I have sent to Colonel Hodges, directing him to join 
with Lieutenant-Colonel Napier in making this demand. 

I am, &e. 


(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


nn 


No. 256. 


Baron Brunnow to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received May 18.) 


My Lord, Londres, ce 15 Mai, 1841. 


IL y a aujourd’hui deux mois que nous avons paraphé la Convention 
conclue par les Cours de Russie, d’Autriche, de France, de la Grande 
Bretagne, et de Prusse, avec Sa Hautesse le Sultan, relative au principe 
de la fermeture des détroits des Dardanelles et du Bosphore. 

Votre Excellence voudra bien se rappeler qu’ l’époque ot nous 
avons conclu cette transaction, je me suis décidé 4 y concourir, avant 
méme d’avoir recu les Plein-pouvoirs formels qui m’étaient nécessaires 
pour signer cet Acte. ae sae 

A cette époque, ayant déja sollicité auprés du Cabinet Impérial Penvoi 
de mes Plein-pouvoirs et me trouvant dans l’attente de les recevoir, je ne 
vous ai pas laissé ignorer qu’il me paraissait plus régulier de ne procéder 
ala conclusion de lActe projeté que lorsque j’aurais recua cet effet l’ordre 
formel qui devait m’autoriser 4 y apposer ma signature. | 

Quelque fondés que fussent les motifs qui m’ont porté a émettre alors 
cette opinion dans nos entretiens avec MM. les Plénipotentiaires d’Au- 
triche et de Prusse, deux considérations, vous le savez, m’ont décidé 4 ne 
pas y insister : as 

1°. J’ai partagé avec vous le désir de ne pas retarder l’accomplisse- 
ment d’une ceuvre de conciliation qui, en manifestant accord heureuse- 
ment rétabli entre les Cing Puissances, ferait cesser l’isolement volontaire 
de la France, et offrirait ainsi 4 la paix de l'Europe un nouveau gage de 
sécurité. . 

2°. J’ai reconnu le besoin d’accélérer autant que possible le moment 
ou nos Alliés du Continent seraient libérés du fardeau que leur imposent 
les préparatifs militaires quils ont été obligé de faire en présence des 
armemens de la France; attitude mutuellement onéreuse que nous avions 
tous 4 ceeur de faire cesser, en assurant enfin a l'Europe le bienfait d’une 
paix réelle, sans défiance et sans armes. iy 

Telles sont, Mylord, les raisons qui mont déterminé a prendre sur 
moi de concourir 4 la transaction que nous avons arrétée, avant que les 
distances qui me séparent de mon Cabinet m’eussent permis de recevoir 
les Plein-pouvoirs que j’avais sollicités. diss ; 

En prenant cette détermination, j’avais la conviction que les motifs 
de ma conduite seraient honorés de l’approbation de Sa Majesté 
’ 

TP ORR eas ie n’a pas tardé 4 étre confirmé: dans le plus court délai 
possible, les Plein-pouvoirs que javais sollicités me sont parvenus. Et 
par un effet de cette constance de vues et de principes qui ont invariable- 
ment guidé le Cabinet Impérial durant toute la crise du Levant, | Empe- 
reur a daigné me renvoyer le méme Plein-pouvoir en vertu duquel j’ai 


3G2 


412 


signé la Convention du 15 Juillet; Plein-pouvoir dont Sa Majesté avait 
daigné me munir dés l’origine pour signer un Acte a cinq sur la pacifica- 
tion de Orient. Il suffira de la simple date de ce document pour dé- 
montrer une fois de plus, que jamais nous n’avons voulu exclure la 
France de ce pacte mémorable, puisque, si elle avait voulu y_participer, 
j’étais pleinement autorisé 4 conclure et signer avec elle la Convention 
de Juillet. . 

C’est en vertu de ce méme Plein-pouvoir que l’Empereur m’a auto- 
risé maintenant A signer la Convention relative aux détroits des Darda- 
nelles et du Bosphore; transaction dont Sa Majesté a daigné approuver 
la teneur telle que nous l’avons arrétée de concert par la Convention. 
paraphée le 15 Mars. 

Me trouvant muni a cet effet des ordres formels de ma Cour, et’ 
ayant recu l’assentiment de l’Empereur 4 l’ceuvre de conciliation que nos 
soins ont été employ¢és 4 accomplir, je ne saurais m’empécher de rap- 
peler aujourd’hui, que les motifs qui nous ont décidé dans le tems a accé- 
Iérer cette ceuvre, continuent a subsister dans toute leur force. Aujour- 
d’hui comme alors, Europe réclame de nous ce gage de paix que nos 
efforts et nos travaux réunis ont eu pour but de lui offrir. 

Cependant, ce résultat si désirable a été différé jusqu’a ce jour par 

des obstacles indépendans de notre volonté. 
En effet, 4 l’époque ot nous avons définitivement arrété la rédaction 
de la Convention relative aux détroits des Dardanelles et du Bosphore, le 
Cabinet des Tuileries a hésité de signer cet Acte, et n’a autorisé son Plé- 
nipotentiaire qu’a le parapher. | 

Animés d’un sincére désir de conciliation, nous n’avons pas voulu 
élever alors une contestation facheuse sur un simple délai que nous avions 
lieu de considérer comme de peu de durée; et dans cette persuasion nous 
avons apprécié avec la plus grande équité les motifs de Vhésitation qu’é- 
prouvait le Cabinet des Tuileries. Elle provenait nommément de l’appré- 
hension que le Ministére Francais avait concue, que de nouvelles difficultés 
pourraient survenir 4 Alexandrie 4 la suite des firmans émanés 4 Con- 
stantinople le 13 Février; et qu’au milieu des complications auxquelles 
cet état de choses pourrait conduire, les Cours signataires de la’Conven-: 
tion du 15 Juillet seraient appelées peut-étre a interposer en faveur de 
la Porte des démarches et des actes ultérieurs, auxquels la France devrait 
rester étrangére. 

Dans cet état d’incertitude, le Cabinet des Tuileries a jugé préférable, 
dans l’intérét de sa position, de ne pas apposer sa signature a la Conven-> 
tion projetée, aussi longtems que resterait encore ouverte l’éventualité 
d’une intervention a laquelle la France ne participerait point. 

Si nous avons compris cette difficulté, et sinous avons témoigné alors 
de justes égards au Cabinet des Tuileries en ne recusant pas les motifs 
qui Vengageaient a différer la signature de la Convention arrétée 4 Londres 
le 15 Mars, qu'il me soit permis de dire aujourd’hui que les motifs de ce 
retard ont complétement cessé d’exister. 

La Porte Ottomane a désiré elle-méme applanir les difficuités qui 
s'étaient élévées au sujet de l’interprétation de quelques unes des disposi-: 
tions des firmans du 13 Février. Dans ce but, elle a chargé son Ambas- 
sadeur a Londres de nous adresser la communication dont Chékib Effendi 
s’est acquitté le 27 Avril. La réponse que nous venons de lui faire est 
concue de maniére a éloigner toute incertitude sur les questions de détail 
qu'il restait 4 résoudre. Elle annonce en méme tems dans les termes les 
plus positifs: “Que nous ne pouvons considérer la soumission de Méhémet 
Ali que comme absolue, et par conséquent I’ Affaire Turco-Egyptienne 
comme terminée.” 

_Les chances d’une nouvelle complication que le Cabinet Francais 
avait prévue au mois de Mars dernier, se trouvent ainsi heureusement 
écartées. Nos soins réunis ont été consacrés & empécher que cette éven-— 
tualité ne vint 4 se réaliser. Sil restait aujourd’hui une seule chance de 
complication future, ce serait celle de voir Méhémet Ali, enhardi par la 
condescendance de la Porte, élever:de rechef ses prétentions au point de 
faire surgir de nouvelles contestations, de maniére 4 mettre en péri la 
paix a peine rétablie dans le Levant. 


413... 


Or, il est évident, que tant que Méhémet Ali conserve l’espoir de voir 
subsister encore un reste de mésintelligence entre les Grandes Puissances 
de l’Kurope, il fondera sur cet espoir tous ses calculs; dés lors, il se. mon- 
trera moins traitable envers la Porte; multipliera ses demandes et ses 
exigences ; et se livrera de nouveau aux mémes espérances qu’il a nourries 
al’époque ot il croyait pouvoir exploiter au profit de son ambition le 
manque d’accord qui régnait entre les Cing Puissances. 

‘Tous ces calculs de Méhémet Ali tomberont lorsqu’il verra que la 
France, replacée aujourd’hui sous une administration sagement_ pacifique, 
s’est rapprochée des autres Cabinets pour attester en commun avec eux le 
respect qu’elle porte a linviolabilité des droits de souveraineté du Sultan, 
ainsi que son sincére désir de voir se consolider le repos de |’Empire 
Ottoman. ; 

En manifestant ces déterminations dans un but de conservation et de 
paix, la France démontrera ainsi ’ Méhémet Ali qu’il ne saurait compter 
sur elle sil essayait de rechef de porter atteinte aux droits de souveraineté 
de la Porte, ou s’il cherchait encore une fois 4 compromettre le repos de 
V’Empire Ottoman. 

Dés lors, le Pacha d’Egypte, voyant lunanimité des Grandes Puis- 
sances parfaitement rétablie, se résignerait 4 se renfermer dans les bornes 
de l’obéissance, et renoncerait a élever envers la Porte des prétentions 
inadmissibles qui, t6t ou tard, finiraient par conduire 4 un renouvellement 
WVhostilité. 

Dans état actuel des choses, le Gouvernement Francais, s’il différait 
encore la signature de la Convention que nous avons conclue, risquerait 
done d’encourager, sans le vouloir, les espérances de Méhémet Ali; de 
hausser ses prétentions envers la Porte, et de multiplier ainsi les causes 
qui tendent a prolonger cette crise dont la France, de concert avec les 
Quatre Cours Alliées, désirerait hater le terme. 

Dans la circonstance du moment, la signature de la Convention 
projetée, par l’effet moral qu’elle devra produire sur Méhémet Ali, me 
parait donc le meilleur moyen 4 employer pour le retenir dans les bornes 
de la soumission et du devoir, et pour assurer ainsi la stabilité du repos 
que toutes les Puissances de l'Europe ont également 4 coeur de raffermir 
dans le Levant. 

Telles sont, Mylord, les considérations d’un intérét général sur 
lesquelles je me permets d’appeler votre attention. Je m’acquitte de ce 
devoir avec la certitude de rencontrer par la vos intentions ainsi que 
celles de mes Collégues d’Autriche et de Prusse. Pour ma part, ayant 
regu l’ordre formel de signer la Convention que nous avons conclue il y a 
deux mois, je croirais mal répondre a la sollicitude de ’Empereur, si je; 
ne signalais pas aujourd’hui Vimportance quwil y a a ne pas différer 
davantage Vaccomplissement d’une ceuvre de conciliation que l’Kurope 
attend depuis si longtems, et qu'elle regarde avec confiance comme un 
nouveau gage de l’affermissement de la paix générale. 

Veuillez, &c., 
(Signé) BRUNNOW. 


(Translation.) 


My Lord, London, May 15, 1841. 

IT is two months to-day since we initialed the Convention concluded 
by the Courts of Russia, Austria, France, Great Britain, and Prussia with 
His Highness the Sultan, relative to the principle of the closing of the 
Straights of the Dardanelles and of the Bosphorus. 

Your Excellency will have the goodness to recollect that at the time. 
when we concluded that agreement, I determined to concur in it, even 
before I had received the formal Full Powers which were required by me 
for the signature of that Act. , ; 

At that time, having already applied to the Imperial Cabinet to send 
my Full Powers, and being in the expectation of receiving them, I did. not 
allow you to be ignorant that it seemed to me more regular not to proceed _ 


Al4 


to the conclusion of the Act in contemplation until I should have received 
the formal order to that effect which should authorize me to sign it. 

Whatever foundation there was for the reasons which induced me at 
that time to express this opinion in our discussions with the Plenipoten- 
tiaries of Austria and Prussia, two considerations, you are aware, decided 
me not to insist thereupon. a 

1°. I shared with you the desire of not retarding the accomplishment 
of a work of reconciliation, which, by manifesting the agreement happily 
re-established among the Five Powers, would cause the voluntary isola- 
tion of France to cease, and would thus offer to the peace of Europe a 
new pledge of security. 

- 2°. [perceived the necessity of accelerating as much as possible the 
arrival of the period at which our Allies of the Continent might be re- 
leased from the burden imposed upon them by the military preparations 
which they have been obliged to make by reason of the armaments of 
France; an attitude mutually onerous, which we all had at heart to bring 
to an end, by ensuring at length to Europe the benefit of a real peace, 
without distrust and without arms. 

Such, my Lord, are the reasons which decided me to take upon 
myself to concur in the agreement to which we came, previously to the 
distance which separates me from my Cabinet having admitted of my 
receiving the Full Powers for which I had applied. 

In adopting this decision, I felt convinced that the reasons for my’ 
conduct would be honoured with the approbation of His Majesty the 
Emperor. 

This hope was presently confirmed; after the shortest delay possible, 
the Full Powers for which I had applied reached me. And as a conse- 
quence of that steadiness of views and of principles which have invariably 
guided the Imperial Cabinet during the whole crisis of the Levant, the 
Emperor has been pleased to send back to me the same Full Power, in 
virtue of which I signed the Convention of the 15th of July; the Full 
Power with which His Majesty had in the beginning been pleased to 
furnish me, for the signature of a Quintuple Act on the pacification of the 
Levant. The mere date of this document will suffice once more to prove 
that we have never been desirous of excluding France from that memora- 
ble compact, since, if she had been willing to take part im it, I was fully 
authorized to conclude and sign with her the Convention of July. 

It is in virtue of this same Full Power that the Emperor has autho- 
rized me now to sign the Convention relative to the Straights of the 
Dardanelles and of the Bosphorus; an agreement the tenour of which, 
such as we settled it in concert by the Convention initialed on the 15th of 
March, His Majesty has been pleased to approve. 

Being provided for this purpose with the formal orders of my Court, 
and having received the assent of the Emperor to the work of reconcilia- 
tion which our efforts have been employed in accomplishing, I cannot help 
repeating at present that the reasons which decided us at the time to 
accelerate that work, continue to subsist in all their force. Now, as then, 
Europe requires from us this pledge of peace which our united efforts and 
labours had for their object to offer to her. . 

Nevertheless, this so desirable result has been put off up to the present 
time, by obstacles independent of our will. 

. In fact, at the time when we finally settled the terms of the Conven- 
tion relative to the Straights of the Dardanelles and of the Bosphorus, 
the Cabinet of the Tuileries hesitated to sign that Act, and only authorized 
its Plenipotentiary to initial it. 3 

- Being animated with a sincere desire of reconciliation, we were 
unwilling at that time to raise an angry discussion upon a mere delay 
which we had grounds for considering of short duration; and under this. 
persuasion we appreciated with the utmost equity the motives of the 
hesitation felt by the Cabinet of the Tuileries. It originated namely in 
the apprehension entertained by the French Ministry, that new difficulties 
might arise at Alexandria in consequence of the firmans issued at Con- 
stantinople on the 13th of February; and that in the midst of the compli- 
cations to which that state of things might lead, the Courts parties to- 


ALD 


the Convention of the 15th of July might perhaps be called upon to inter- 
pose in favour of the Porte by further proceedings and Acts, to which 
France would have to remain a stranger. . 

In this state of uncertainty, the Cabinet of the Tuileries deemed it 
preferable, with reference to its own position, not to affix its signature to 
the contemplated Convention, so long as the contingency of an interven- 
tion in which France would take no part, still remained open. 

If we comprehended that difficulty, and if we manifested at that time 
due consideration for the Cabinet of the Tuileries in not rejecting the 

grounds which induced it to put off the signature of the Convention agreed 

upon in London on the 15th of March, permit me at the present time to 
say, that the grounds of that delay have altogether ceased to have any 
existence. 

The Ottoman Porte has been desirous itself to smooth away the 
difficulties which had arisen on the subject of the interpretation of some 
of the provisions of the firmans of the 13th of February. With this view, 
it has directed its Ambassador at London to address to us the communi- 
cation which Chekib Effendi made on the 27th of April. The answer which 
we have just returned to him is drawn up so as to remove all uncertainty 
upon the questions of detail which remained to be solved. It states at 
the same time, in the most positive terms, “ that we cannot but consider 
the submission of Mehemet Ali as absolute, and, consequently, the Turco- 
Egyptian affair as terminated.” 

The chances of a new complication which the French Cabinet had 
foreseen in the month cf March last, are thus happily removed. Our 
united efforts have been employed to prevent this contingency from being 
realized. Jf there should remain at present a single chance of future 
complication, it would be that of Mehemet Ali, encouraged by the com- 
pliance of the Porte, raising his pretensions anew so as to give rise to 
discussions, in such a manner as to put in jeopardy the peace scarcely 
re-established in the Levant. 

_ Now, it is evident, that so long as Mehemet Ali retains the hope of 
seeing a remnant of misunderstanding still subsist among the Great 
Powers of Europe, he will rest upon that hope all his calculations; thence- 
forth he will show himself less tractable towards the Porte; will multiply 
his demands and his exactions; and will again give himself up to the same 
expectations as those which he cherished, at the time when he thought he 
might turn to the advantage of his own ambition, the want of agreement 
which prevailed among the Five Powers. 

All these calculations of Mehemet Ali will fall to the ground when he 
shall see that France, now replaced under an administration wisely pacific, 
has drawn closer to the other Cabinets, in order to testify in common 
with them the respect which she entertains for the inviolability of the 
Sultan’s rights of Sovereignty, as well as her sincere desire to see the 
repose of the Ottoman Empire firmly established. 

| By evincing these determinations for a conservative and peaceful 
purpose, France will thus prove to Mehemet Ali, that he cannot count 
upon her if he should again attempt to assail the rights of Sovereignty of 
the Porte, or if he should seek once again to compromise the repose of 
the Ottoman Empire. baie 

Thereupon, the Pasha of Egypt, beholding the unanimity of the. 
Great Powers perfectly re-established, would resign himself to remaming 
within the bounds of obedience, and would abstain from putting forth 
pretensions with regard to the Porte which, sooner or later, would end by 
leading to a renewal of hostility. a 

, In the actual state of things then, the French Government, if it should 
still delay signing the Convention which we have concluded, would run 
the risk of encouraging, without wishing to do so, the expectations of 
Mehemet Ali; of increasing his pretensions as regards the Porte ; and of 
thus multiplying the causes which tend to prolong that crisis, of which 
France, in concert with the Allied Courts, would desire to hasten the 
termination. , sorter | ceaniagemannapteemniiaaenenntarad 

Under existing circumstances then, the signature of the contemplated 

Convention, by the moral effect which it-will necessarily produce upon 


416 


Mehemet Ali, appears to me the best means which can be employed for 
retaining him within the bounds of submission and of duty, and for 
ensuring thereby the stability of the repose which all the Powers of 
Europe have equally at heart to confirm in the Levant. 

Such, my Lord, are the considerations of general interest to which I 
allow myself to call your attention. I perform this duty with the cer- 
tainty of falling in with, by so doing, your intentions, as well as those of 
my Colleagues of Austria and of Prussia. For my part, having received 
the formal order to sign the Convention which we concluded two months 
ago, I should consider that I did not act in accordance with the anxiety 
of the Emperor, if I did not now point out how important it is no longer 
to delay the accomplishment of a work of reconciliation which Europe has 
for so long a time been looking to, and which it confidently considers as 
a new pledge for the confirmation of the general peace. 

Be pleased, &c., 
(Signed) BRUNNOW. 


No. 257, 


Mr. Bulwer to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received May 17.) 


(Extract.) Paris, May 14, 1841. 


YOUR Lordship will probably be already aware, since I understand , 
that the papers just communicated to me by Count Appony * have been 
forwarded to London, that the Reis Effendi addressed a memorandum on the 
19th of April to the Ambassadors of the Four Powers, informing them of 
the intentions of the Sultan, (acquiescing thereby in the representations of 
his Allies,) to award the hereditary grant of the Pashalic of Egypt to 
Mehemet Ali, to give him the nomination of the officers in the army up to 
the rank of Colonel, (that title being included,) and to change the Tribute, 
so that instead of the fourth part of the revenue of Egypt, it should be 
a fixed sum, that sum to be determined by the existing resources of the 
country. I hear, in reference to this, that the Austrian Internuncio 
recommended Rifaat to adopt the sum of 15,000 purses (something less, 
I believe, than 2,000,000 of Francs,) Rifaat himself being inclined to insist 
on 18,000 purses. The Reis Effendi at the same time, requests the 
Ambassadors to define with more accuracy than they have yet done, the 
manner in which they considered that the laws of the rest of the Turkish 
empire should be applied to Mehemet’s Pashalic; to which I under- 
stand, that the Representative of Austria replied by saying, that while it 
was no doubt necessary that the general system of government proclaimed 
by the Porte should extend throughout the Sultan’s dominions, he did not — 
doubt but that this would be done with due reference to the peculiar 
circumstances that prevailed in the different portions of the Turkish 
empire. M. Guizot said to Count Appony, that he considered the 
arrangement satisfactory, and that as soon as it was notified to M. de 
Bourqueney by the Conference in London, the French Chargé d’Affaires 
would have instructions to sign the Treaty of the 15th March. 

I also saw M. Guizot this morning before seeing Count Appony, and 
being then aware of the general nature of the intelligence which the 
Count afterwards gave me in detail, asked his Excellency whether he did 
not now feel ready to conclude the Separate Convention to which I have 
just alluded. M. Guizot said, “ Yes, I shall in all probability give Baron 
de Bourqueney instructions to that effect; still I should first wish to hear 
that the firman had been acctually sent. Of this, however,’ he con- 
tinued, ‘‘ be sure, I shall never submit my decision to Mehemet Ali’s.” 

A council is to be held this day on the subject. 


ann SS snssesisparssusnassnessssesoh 


* Inclosure in No. 260, 


A\7 


No. 238. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received May 17.) 


My Lord, Therapia, April 14, 1841. 

I HAVE the honour to inclose copies of an official Note I this day 
received from his Excellency the Internuncio, and my reply to it. 

I hope my answer will show sufficiently, for the present occasion, 
what I have done. I have strictly followed your Lordship’s instructions 
according to my understanding of the documents referred to therein. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 258. 
Baron de Sttirmer to Viscount Ponsonby. 


Monsieur |’ Ambassadeur, Constantinople, 13 Avril, 1841. 


L’ESTAFETTE arrivée de Vienne hier au soir m’a apporté la 
dépéche ci-jointe que je m’empresse de porter a la connaissance de votre 
Excellence, en la priant de me la renvoyer dés qu’elle en aura pris lecture. 

Vous y verrez, M. V Ambassadeur, qu’il m’est enjoint de la maniére la 
plus péremptoire d’insister auprés de la Porte pour qu'il plaise 4 Sa 
Hautesse de se conformer sans délai ultérieur aux voeux de ses augustes 
Alliées. 

Tous mes efforts doivent dés lors étre consacrés a ce but, et j’ose prier 
votre Excellence de me dire si je puis compter dans cette circonstance sur 
son concours? Celui de nos Collégues de Russie et de Prusse m’est déja 
assuré, et M. le Comte de Koénigsmark étant venu en ville par hasard ce 
matin, nous avons pu en conférer aussité6t avec M. de Titow, et sommes 
tombés d’accord dés aujourd’hui de tenir 4 la Porte un_ langage 
parfaitement uniforme. Nous serions heureux de voir votre Excellence 
se joindre A nous, et méme de se mettre a notre téte, afin de pouvoir ainsi 
constater de nouveau aux yeux de la Porte et du monde Vunion qui 


jusqu’ici a présidé a tous les actes de l’alliance. 
Veuillez, &c., 
(Signé) STURMER. 


(Translation.) 


M. Ambassadeur, Constantinople, April 13, 1841. 


THE estafette which arrived yesterday evening from Vienna has 
brought me the annexed despatch which I hasten to communicate to your 
Excellency, requesting you to send it back to me after having read it. 

You will see therein, M. Ambassadeur, that I am enjoined in the 
most peremptory manner to insist with the Porte that His Highness may 
be pleased to conform himself without further delay to the wishes of his 
August Allies. 

All my efforts must henceforth be devoted to this object, and I venture 
to request your Excellency to inform me if I can reckon upon your con- 
currence inthis instance? Iam already assured of that of our Colleagues 
of Russia and Prussia, and Count Koenigsmark having accidentally come 
into town this morning, we have been enabled forthwith to confer there- 
upon with M. de Titow, and we have agreed from this very day to hold 
to the Porte a language altogether uniform. We should be happy to see 
_ your Excellency join us, and even Ae yourself at our head, in order thus 


418 


to have it in our power again to manifest to the Porte and to the world 
the union which up to this time has prevailed in all the acts of the 
alliance. 

Be pleased, &c., 

(Signed) STURMER. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 258. 


Viscount Ponsonby to the Baron de Sturmer. 


Monsieur l’Internonce, Therapia, April 14, 1841. 


I HAD the honour to receive this day at a few minutes before 4 
o’clock your Excellency’s official Note dated the 13th instant, and I reply 
to it without a moment’s delay. Your Excellency has communicated to 
me a despatch you have received from Vienna, containing directions for 
the conduct your Excellency is to pursue, and your Excellency expresses 
your desire that I should act im co-operation with your Excellency and 
both our Colleagues of Russia and Prussia, in furtherance of the measure 
you are directed to adopt. If I am notin error, the measure you are to 
take, is to make known to the Sublime Porte the opinions and views of 
the Conference at London, as that opinion, or those views, are stated and 
exposed in the Collective Note of the Representatives of the Four Powers 
addressed to Chekib Effendi, and dated 13th of March, 1841, and in Lord 
Palmerston’s instructions, dated 16th of March, 1841, and addressed 
to me. 

I have already had the honour to acquaint you, that I had not only 
made known to the Ottoman Minister the contents of those documents, 
stating at the same time the opinion I entertained of the anxiety of the 
Allies to bring the Egyptian Question to a termination at any rate; but 1 
also communicated to the Minister for Foreign Affairs the Collective Note 
and Lord Palmerston’s instructions in original. Your Excellency will 
therefore be satisfied that I have already done in my individual capacity 
that which is so fervently urged in the despatch your Excellency has 
received. 

Your Excellency will, I am sure, have the goodness to acquaint me 
what you and our Colleagues may desire to have done further for making 
known the opinion and views of the Conference to the Sublime Porte; I 
mean the mode of acting. Your Excellency is, no doubt, fully informed 
of the fact that the Ottoman Ministers have come to a decision to modify 
the Article of succession to the Government of Egypt, with the view of 
rendering it agreeable to the wishes of the Conference; that the Ottoman 
Ministers have also modified, with a similar intention, the Article of the 
roilitary rank to be conferred by the Pasha of Egypt; and that they are 
engaged in considering in what manner the Article of tribute may be 
modified so as to meet the views of the Conference. 

Your Excellency is also acquainted with the disposition manifested 
in the instructions sent by Rechid Pasha to Chekib Effendi, to arrange this 
last-mentioned point; and no doubt your Excellency will esteem that to be 
an evidence from which we may draw the conclusion, that the Sublime 
Porte is desirous to gratify the wishes of the High Allies of the Sultan 
and may be supposed likely to act in the spirit of concession whenever 


tne wishes of those Powers shall have been made known to the Sublime 
Porte. 


I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


419 


No. 259. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received May 17.) 


My Lord, Therapia, April 14, 1841. 
THE Sublime Porte has come to the resolution,— 
ist. That the Government of Egypt shall be inherited by the eldest 
son. 
2nd. That Mehemet Ali shall have the right to appoint officers to 
any rank in the army below that of General of Brigade; but a General of 
Brigade being a Pasha, the Porte refuses to allow Mehemet Ali to name 
Pashas. 
3rd. The tribute will be fixed at a given sum. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No. 260. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received May 17.) 


My Lord, Therapia, April 21, 1841. 
I HAVE the honour to inclose a memorandum from the Porte, and 
my answer. 
I have, &e., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 260. 


Memorandum from the Sublime Porte to the Representatives of the Four 
Powers. April 19, 1841. 


(Traduction. ) 


SA Hautesse, eu égard aux conseils bienveillans que les Hautes Cours 
Alliées viennent encore de lui donner, et voulant donner de nouveaux 
témoignages de ses faveurs souveraines dont elle a déjd usé envers 
Méhémet Ali Pacha, s’empresse de déclarer que :— 

L’hérédité du gouvernement de l’Egypte est accordée 4 Méhémet Ali 
Pacha, a condition qu’il exécutera complétement, ainsi qu’il le dit dans sa 
lettre, les traités et les autres engagemens de la Sublime Porte actuelle- 
ment existans et a étre conclus a l’avenir avec toutes les Puissances 
Amies; la succession au gouvernement devant passer en ligne droite 
dans la postérité male, de Vain 4 Vainé, parmi les fils et les petits-fils, 
a chaque vacance, la nomination de celui qui devra étre Gouverneur de 
VEgypte se fera de la part de la Sublime Porte. 

On ne songe plus a établir pour tribut le quart des revenus ; mais le 
tribut sera proportionné aux revenus actuels de l’Egypte; et le quantum 
qui aura été fixé sera percu comme un tout a étre payé annuellement. 

Quant aux grades militaires, on pourra nommer en Egypte jusqu’au 
rang de Colonel ; lorsqwil s’agira d’un rang supérieur 4 celui de Colonel, 
on le demandera a la Sublime Porte qui P’accordera gracieusement. 

On est aprés de faire des arrangemens a tous ces égards. 

Mais dans la lettre arrivée de la part de Méhémet Ali Pacha, il n’y a 
rien de précis relativement 4 la mise complétement a exécution des lois 
de la Sublime Porte en Egypte: or, c’est ld un point établi par l’Acte 
Séparé du Traité d’Alliance; et comme on ne peut pas savoir ce que les 
Puissances Alliées diront, lorsqu’elles verront de la part de Méhémet 

3 H2 


420 


Ali, soit 4 présent soit 4 Vavenir, des procédés montrant qu’il n’a pas 
accepté et qu’il ne remplit pas une condition qui est de l’essence du 
Traité, les Ministres de la Sublime Porte ont jugé qwil est important de 
demander 4 votre Excellence quelles sont ses notions précises la-dessus, et 
quelle communication elle aurait 4 faire sur ce point? , 

Nous vous prions done de vouloir bien nous faire savoir par écrit 
ce que vous avez a dire sur le point dont nous venons de parler; et c’est 
pour cela que nous vous remettons le présent Mémorandum. | 


(Translation.). 


April 19, 1841. 


HIS Highness, having regard to the benevolent advice which the 
High Allied Courts have now again offered to him, and being desirous of 
affording fresh evidence of his sovereign favour, which he has already 
exerted with regard to Mehemet Ali Pasha, hastens to declare that: 

The hereditary succession to the Government of Egypt is granted to 
Mehemet Ali Pasha, on condition that he shall execute completely, as he 
says in his letter, the Treaties and the other engagements of the Sublime 
Porte, now existing, or to be hereafter concluded, with all friendly Powers ; 
as the succession to the Government is to descend in a direct line in his 
male posterity, from the elder to the elder, among the sons and grand- 
sons, on each vacancy, the appointment of that person who shall be 
Governor of Egypt shall be made by the Sublime Porte. 

There is no longer any idea of fixing the fourth part of the revenues 
as tribute; but the tribute shall be proportioned to the actual revenues of 
Egypt; and the amount which shall be fixed upon, shall be received in one 
sum to be paid annually. 

As to military ranks, nominations may be made in Egypt up to the 
rank of Colonel; when there shall be question of a higher rank, it shall be 
applied for to the Sublime Porte, which will graciously grant it. i 

Arrangements are being made in all these respects. 

*But in the letter which has arrived from Mehemet Ali nothing pre- 
cise is said relative to the complete execution in Egypt of the laws of the 
Sublime Porte: now, that is a point laid down in the Separate Act of the 
Treaty of Alliance; and as it is not possible to know what the Allied 
Powers will say, when they shall see on the part of Mehemet Ali, either 
now or hereafter, proceedings showing that he has not accepted and that 
he does not fulfil a condition which is one of the essentials of the Treaty, 
the Ministers of the Sublime Porte have considered it important to inquire 
of your Excellency what are your precise notions on that point, and what 
communication it ought to make thereupon ? 

We request you therefore to have the goodness to acquaint us in 
writing with what you have to say on the point above-mentioned; and it 
is for that purpose that we transmit to you this Memorandum. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 260. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Rifaat Pasha. 


| Therapia, April 26, 1841. 

THE Undersigned has the honour to acknowledge the receipt of a 
Memorandum communicated to him from the Sublime Porte by his 
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs, dated 19th April, wherein, after 
having stated the measures determined upon by the Sublime Porte with 
reference to Mehemet Ali, the Sublime Porte is pleased to desire to have 
his opinion in writing upon a point which is stated as follows: “ *Mais dans 
la lettre arrivée de la part de Méhémet Ali Pacha, il n’y a rien de précis 
relativement 4 la mise complétement a exécution des lois de la Sublime 
Porte en Egypte; or, c’est 14 un point établi par l’Acte Séparé du Traité 
d’Alliance ; et comme on ne peut pas savoir ce que les Puissances Alliées 


* For translation, see translation of Inclosure 1 in 260. 


421, 


diront, lorsqu’elles verront de la part de Méhémet Ali, soit a présent 
soit A ’avenir, des procédés montrant qwil n’a pas accepté et qu’il ne 
remplit pas une condition qui est de essence du Traité, les Ministres 
de la Sublime Porte ont jugé qu’il est important de demander a votre 
Excellence quelles sont ses notions précises la-dessus, et quelle communi- 
cation elle aurait 4 faire sur ce point?” 

The Undersigned, in compliance with the desire expressed by the 
Sultan, replies in writing and says, that he is at present equally as 
ignorant as the Sublime Porte, what will be the opinion of the Allies 
upon the points stated by the Sublime Porte, and is unable to offer any 
advice as to the further measures of the Sublime Porte with reference to 
Mehemet Ali. 

The Undersigned expects to receive instructions from his Govern- 
ment in a week or ten days, which will enable him to communicate to 
the Sublime Porte the feelings and the wishes of the British Government ; 
and until the Undersigned is thereby authorized to speak upon the 
subject in question, he must beg that the Sublime Porte will excuse his 
silence. | 

The Undersigned has, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No. 261. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received May 17.) 


My Lord, Therapia, April 21, 1841. 
I HAVE the honour to inclose copy of a Note I wrote to the Internun- 
cio in consequence of my not having had a reply to my note of the l4th. 
have this evening received his Excellency’s answer, and I inclose a copy 
of it. 
I have, &c.,, 


(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 261. 


Viscount Ponsonby to the Baron de Sturmer. 


Monsieur I’ Internonce, Therapia, April 19, 1841. 


ON the 14th instant I had the honour to receive an official note from 
your Excelleney desiring me to inform you if I was disposed to co-operate 
with your Excellency and our colleagues in carrying into effect the 
instructions received from our Courts, &c., &c. 

I had the honour to reply to your Excellency’s note the same day, 
and after having, at some length, explained what my conduct had 
been, (being desirous to concur with my colleagues,) [ requested your 
Excellency to have the goodness to inform me in what way your 
Excellency and our colleagues desired that I should act, in furtherance of 
the instructions of our Governments. 

This is the fifth day since I sent my note, and not having had the 
honour to hear from you, I take the liberty to express my hope, that 
your Excellency will favour me with a reply, as it is necessary for me to 


state to my Government everything connected with this affair. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


422 


Inclosure 2 in No. 261. 


Baron de Stiirmer to Viscount Ponsonby. 


Monsieur |’ Ambassadeur, Constantinople, 21 Avril, 1841. 


J’AI recu hier matin la lettre que votre Excellence m’a fait ’honneur 
de m’adresser avant-hier. 

Le Sultan venant enfin de prendre a l’égard du Pacha d’Egypte des 
résolutions conformes aux conseils et aux voeux de ses Augustes Alliées, 
et ces résolutions nous ayant été annoncées hier officiellement, notre 
tache, ce me semble, est accomplie. La question que vous voulez bien 
me faire, M. l Ambassadeur, sur le genre de co-opération que nous atten- 
dions de votre part, nos Collégues de Russie et de Prusse et moi, devient 
donc sans objet. 

Si je n’ai pas répondu a cette méme question que renfermait déja 
votre lettre du 13 de ce mois, c’est que vous m’y aviez assuré que vous 
aviez fait tout ce qui avait dépendu de vous, en communiquant a la Porte 
les actes de la Conférence de Londres et les instructions de Lord 
Palmerston du 16 Mars, et en lui faisant connaitre en méme temps le vif 
désir des Puissances Alliées de voir l’affaire d’Egypte conduite a terme 
“at any rate.” Or, c’était précisément ce que nous voulions proposer 4 - 
votre Excellence de faire, et il ne nous restait ainsi plus rien 4 lui 
demander. 

Veuillez, &c. 


(Signé) TURMER. 


(Translation.) 


M. ? Ambassadeur, Constantinople, April 21, 1841. 

I RECEIVED yesterday morning the letter which your Excellency 
did me the honour to address to me the day before yesterday. 

The Sultan having at length adopted with regard to the Pasha of 
Egypt resolutions in conformity with the advice and wishes of his 
August Allies, and those resolutions having yesterday been announced to 
us Officially, our task, it appears to me, is accomplished. The question 
which you have the goodness to ask me, M. l’Ambassadeur, as to the 
kind of co-operation which my colleagues of Russia and Prussia and my- 
self expected from you, becomes therefore unnecessary. 

If I have not replied to that same question which was already con- 
tained in your letter of the 13th of this month, it is because you had 
assured me therein that you had done everything which had depended 
upon you, by communicating to the Porte the acts of the Conference of 
London and Lord Palmerston’s instructions of the 16th of March, and in 
acquainting it at the same time with the strong desire of the Allied Powers 
to see the Egyptian affair terminated ‘at any rate.” Now, that was 
precisely what we wished to propose to your Excellency to do, and there 
remained nothing more for us to ask you. 

. Be pleased, &c., 
(Signed) STURMER. 


No. 262. 


Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, May 18, 1841. 

I HAVE to acquaint your Excellency that Her Majesty’s Govern- 
ment approve the letter which you addressed to the Internuncio on the 
14th of April, of which a copy is inclosed in your despatch of that 
day, and in which you stated the measures you had taken to prevail upon 


423 


the Porte: to act upon the suggestions of the Four Powers, with respect 
to the modifications to be made by the Sultan in the conditions annexed 
to the grant to Mehemet Ali of the hereditary government ‘of Egypt. 

I am, &c., 


(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


SS 


No. 263. 
Lord William Russell to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received May 24.) 


My Lord, Berlin, May 19, 1841. 

I COMMUNICATED to Baron Werther your Lordship’s opinion 
as to the guarantee of the integrity of the Turkish Empire demanded 
by the Ottoman Minister at London. His Excellency agreed with your 
Lordship ; but the weakness of the Turkish Government, and the insur- 
rection breaking out at the extremities of the empire, make it doubtful 
whether a guarantee of integrity may not soon become politic. 

Baron Werther likewise approved of your Lordship’s opinion as to 
the time at which it would be expedient that France should affix her 
signature to the Oriental Convention; at the same time he found your 
Lordship’s view of the present and future position of the European 
Powers, especially of France in respect to isolation, clear and judicious. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) WM. RUSSELL. 


No. 264. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received May 26.) 


(Extract.) Therapia, April 28, 1841. 


I MADE known to the Minister for Foreign Affairs the opinions your 
Lordship has expressed upon the various matter and points in the letter 
of Mehemet Ali to the Grand Vizier. I have heard in reply from Rifaat 
Pasha, that he will immediately forward to Alexandria the instructions 
already drawn up for the Ottoman Agent there, and of which a copy was 
transmitted by me to your Lordship. 


No. 265. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received May 26.) 


My Lord, Therapia, April 28, 1841. 

THE Ministers of Austria, Prussia, and Russia, have desired that the 
Consuls of the Four Powers should be sent to Alexandria, and the Sublime 
Porte has consented ; I have, therefore, requested Colonel Hodges to hold 
himself in readiness to accompany his colleagues to Egypt whenever 
they may be despatched from hence. 

I am well aware that the instructions relative to the return of the 
Consuls to Alexandria, were given before the Conference was in possession 
of the most material facts which form the case of this country, but I do 
not think myself authorised to interfere with a measure sanctioned by 
your Lordship. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


aa 


424 


No. 266. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received May 26.) 


My Lord, Therapia, May 3, 1841. 


DURING a visit made me by M. de Titow this morning I received 
from Baron de Stiirmer a despatch from Prince Metternich, dated 19th 
April. M. de Titow had been made acquainted with it by the Internuncio, 
and therefore I was at liberty to read it with him. My opinion was freely 
given in reply to his demand,—it was, that in furtherance of the views ex- 
posed in the despatch, and in your Lordship’s instruction of the 10th April, 
it would be expedient that the Sublime Porte should send to Alexandria 
the firman containing the concessions the Sultan had made upon the three 
points: succession, tribute, and military rank ; and that a letter should 
be written by the Grand Vizier, in reply to that received from Mehemet 
Ali, couched in terms of great civility, and recapitulating the demands 
made by Mehemet Ali in connection with the conditions seriatim, and 
stating with reference to each, briefly, such reasons as the Sublime Porte 
might think fit to give why those demands cannot be complied with, and 
accompanied with the observation on each case, that the demand was in 
contradiction to the advice given to the Sublime Porte by the Four 
Powers, the august Allies of the Sultan. By this, a motive which is 
supposed to have influenced Mehemet Ali, would be counteracted (if it 
existed), namely, the belief that the Four Powers had withdrawn, or would 
withdraw, themselves from the question between the Sublime Porte and 
Mehemet Ali; and also the dignity of the Sultan would be preserved by 
the declared action of the Four Powers, his Allies, as his advisers. 

With relation to the return of the Consuls, which Prince Metternich 
now desires to defer till after Mehemet Ali shall have proved his submis- 
sion by conforming to the settlement that may be made between him and 
the Porte, I said I had always thought the Protocol ordering their return 
had been made by the Conference in ignorance of the exact state of affairs, 


and that the return of the Consuls was inexpedient, but that I had yielded 


to the opinion of my colleagues, who had, in support of it, the letter of 


that Protocol: I therefore could now only be glad that the Consuls were 


still here, and that it was not too late to act in conformity with the present 


views entertained of expediency. 


I have taken care to make Rifaat fully acquainted with your Lord- 
ship’s opinion upon the various propositions or demands made by Mehemet 
Ali for the annulment or the modification of the conditions attached by 
the Sultan, in the firman, to the grant of the hereditary government of 
Egypt to the family of Mehemet Ali; and I have reason to hope and to 
believe, that what your Lordship has stated on those points is likely to be 
the rule by which the Sublime Porte will guide itself in any answer that 
may be made by the Grand Vizier to the letter of Mehemet Ali. I am 
afraid Mehemet Ali is more likely to continue to resist than to submit, 
even so as to give a show that the agitation of this question is terminated ; 
and | feel convinced he will never carry into execution any of the condi- 


_ tions, the effect of which is intended to be the diminution of his power. 


I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


a ee 
No. 267. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received May 26.) 


My Lord, Therapia, May 5, 1841. 

I HAVE reported to your Lordship the substance of my conversation 
on the 3rd with M. de Titow, and that he had undertaken to repeat to the 
Internuncio what had passed. I have this evening received from the 


425 - 


latter his reply to my communication, as follows :— Monsieur de Titow a 
eu l’obligeance de me faire part de Ventretien qu’il a eu avec vous rela- 
tivement au langage que nous devrons tenir 4 la Sublime Porte, ainsi que 
du plan que vous proposez a cet égard, et qui consiste:— 

1°. A hater ’expédition du nouveau firman a envoyer 4 Méhémet Ali. 

2°. A veiller 4 ce que les trois modifications qui nous ont été annon- 
cées dans un Mémorandum de la Porte* comme ayant obtenu la sanction - 
du Sultan, y soient insérées. 

3°. A conseiller 4 la Sublime Porte de faire connaitre 4 Méhémet Ali: 
par une lettre Visirielle les motifs qui l’empéche d’adhérer aux autres 
changemens qu’il sollicite}, motifs qui découlent de l’Acte Séparé de la 
Convention du 15 Juillet#. | 

«4°, A lui annoncer que les Consuls ne retourneront a leurs postes 
que lorsque la soumission de Méhémet Ali pourra étre considérée comme 
complétée. Je n’hésite pas de souscrire point par point a ce plan, et vais 
dés demain y conformer mon langage envers Rifaat Pacha.” 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


(Translation of part of the above Despatch.) 


M. DE TITOW has had the goodness to acquaint me with the con- 
versation which he has had with you relative to the language which we 
should hold to the Sublime Porte, and likewise with the plan which you 
propose in that respect, and which consists: 

1°. In hastening the dispatch of the new firman to be sent to 
Mehemet Ali. | 

2°. In taking care that the three modifications which were notified to 
us in a Memorandum from the Porte as having received the sanction of 
the Sultan, should be inserted therein. 

- 3° In recommending to the Sublime Porte to acquaint Mehemet 
Ali, in a Vizirial letter, with the motives which prevent it from acceding to 
the other alterations which he has requested,—motives which are derived 
from the Separate Act of the Convention of the 15th of July. — 

4°. In announcing to him that the Consuls will not return to their 
posts until the submission of Mehemet Ali can be considered as com- 
pleted. “I do not hesitate concurring point by point in this plan, and I 
shall from to-morrow conform to it my language towards Rifaat Pasha.” 


No. 268. 
Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received May 26.) 


My Lord. Vienna, May 3, 1841. 


IN my despatch of April 22, I stated Prince Metternich’s opinions as 
to the moment at which France ought to convert her paraph into a signa-- 
ture. Having obtained a copy of the Prince’s despatch upon the subject 
to Prince Esterhazy, I have the honour to inclose it to your Lordship. 

Sa IT have, &c., 
(Signed) BEAUVALE. 


* The Memorandum of the Porte is of the 19th of April. p 

+ I said “those alterations which the Porte would refuse to make. i 

{ I added, ‘and from the Collective Note of 30 January, and ..emorandum of 13 March.” . 
31 


426 


Inclosure im No. 268. 
Prince Metternich to Prince Esterhazy. 
(Extract.) Vienne, le 23 Avril, 1841. 


LA poste ordinaire de Constantinople m’a apporté les rapports ci- 
joints de l’Internonce. Ils me donnent Vespoir que la Porte aura adopté 
les conseils de ses alliés, dés que ceux-ci lui auront été présenté par les 
Représentans des Quatre Cours. Le 7 Avril, Lord Ponsonby ne s’était 
pas encore expliqué envers ses collégues ; mais comme la veille il avait 
envoyé 4 Londres un courrier, par lequel il annongait 4 sa Cour qu'il 
agirait en conformité de ses instructions, je tire de cette disposition un 
augure favorable a l’entente entre le Divan et les Puissances. 

Je vous envoie également ci-joint deux directions que j’ai adressées a 
VInternonce le 19 et le 20 Avril; elles suffisent pour vous faire connaitre 
exactement notre maniére de juger la position. 7 

J’ai recu le 20, les rapports de Votre Altesse du 10, ainsi qu’une 
expédition de M. le Comte Appony du 12 de ce mois. Comme cet 
Ambassadeur n’aura pas manqué de vous instruire directement, mon 
Prince, des explications qui ont eu lieu entre lui et M. Guizot au sujet de 
la signature de l’Acte paraphé, il ne me reste qu’a vous faire connaitre 
notre jugement sur l’opportunité de la signature Frangaise. 

Nous, pour notre part, ne sommes en aucune maniére pressés de voir 
apposer cette signature 4 un Acte a la teneur duquel le Cabinet Francais 
est déja lié par son paraphe. Nous trouverions méme plus d’inconvénient 
que d’avantage 4 ce que la Convention fit signée avant que Vaccord 
entre les Quatre Cours et la Porte ne soit définitivement établi, et cela 
par la raison que, si l’établissement de cet accord a jusqu’a cette heure 
rencontré des difficultés entre les Quatre Cours et le Divan, l’adjonction 
d’une cinquiéme Cour, au lieu de faciliter la tache, ne pourrait que la 
rendre plus difficile. 

Aussi, pénétrés comme nous le sommes, de cette conviction, ne nous 
avez-vous jamais vus presser la signature du Cabinet Francais, mais 
bien la fin du différend Turco-Egyptien. I] est évident que la signature 
de la Convention relative a la cléture des détroits n’a rien qui soit en 
rapport direct avec l’affaire Turco-Egyptienne. Je vous prie, mon Prince, 
ainsi que M. le Baron de Neumann, de ne point vous tromper a cet égard. 
Il s’agit ici de deux affaires distinctes de leur nature, et qui n’ont ensemble 
d’autre connexité que celle du point d’arrivée ot elles se rencontreront tout 
naturellement. Confondre ces affaires ce serait ouvrir la porte a plus 
d’un danger, et notre habitude n’est par d’en créer a plaisir. 

Ce qui est vraiment important, ce vers quoi ont dés lors tendu nos 
constans efforts, c’est que laffaire Turco-Egyptienne soit conduite a sa 
fin dans les termes de la Convention du 15 Juillet. Nous désirons ceci, 
parce qu'il entre dans notre marche habituelle de vider les affaires dans 
lesquelles nous sommes engagés, convaincus que, quand le terme d’une 
affaire n’est par clairement marqué, il en nait forcément des affaires nou- 
velles et qui sont placées en dehors de tout calcul possible. Afin que nos 
Plénipotentiaires 4 Londres puissent saisir toute notre pensée a Pégard de 
ce que nous croyons désirable dans la présente position des choses, je vais 
résumer cette pensée dans les points suivans, que je m’appliquerai a bien 
préciser. 

1°. Nous reconnaissons l’existence de deux affaires distinctes de leur 
nature, mais se confondant dans leurs points d’arrivée. 

L’une de ces affaires, c’est le résidu encore existant de la Question 
Turco-Egyptienne. Elle est placée entre les Quatre Cours et la Porte, et 
ses limites sont tracées par les Actes de 15 Juillet, de 14 Novembre et 
17 Décembre 1840, par la Note Collective du 30 Janvier, et les Arrétés du 
5 Mars, 1841. L/’autre affaire, c’est la signature de la Convention relative 
a la cloture des détroits, qui doit s’effectuer entre les Cinq Cours et le 
Divan. 
2°, Les deux affaires ne doivent point étre confondues Pune avec 
Pautre, attendu quelles different dans leur essence. Vu son isolement 
volontaire du Traité du 15 Juillet et de ses conséquences immédiates, le 


427 


Gouvernment Francais n’a point A intervenir dans I’ Affaire Turco-Egyp- 
tienne proprement dite. Lui-méme n’en a pas le désir, et s’il en était 
autrement, nous y verrions un grave inconvénient. La répugnance du 
Cabinet Francais ne repose pas, dans la présente occasion, sur un calcul 
politique actif; elle provient du sentiment, qu’en entrant dans laffaire 
aujourd’hui, il s’engagerait dans une position insoutenable pour l’adminis- 
tration actuelle. Le Cabinet actuel est sage, en un mot, parce qu’il 
lui serait impossible de ne pas l’étre, et cette position génée tournera, 4 
notre avis, 4 ’avantage des Quatre Cours et de la Porte, si elles savent 
conduire 4 bon terme l’entreprise du 15 Juillet; mais cette méme position 
he pourra que tourner a leur désavantage, si elles ne savent point attein- 
dre le but qu’elles se sont proposé a la face de l’Europe, et au soutien 
duquel elles ont voué des efforts couronnés de si éclatans succés matériels! 

_ 3°. Le concours de la France dans l’affaire des détroits n’a, par lui- 
méme, guére d’autre valeur que celle d’un complément de la grande 
cuvre du 15 Juillet. Ce concours présente toutefois le seul mode pour 
délivrer la France (a son profit comme a celui de l'Europe) de son isole- 
ment. Telle étant la vérité 4 Végard de la signature de la Con- 
vention relative a la cloture des détroits, qu’y a-t-il de commun entre cette 
affaire et le réglement définitif des attitudes respectives du Sultan et du 
Pacha d’Egypte? Il est clair que la connexité entre les deux questions 
ne peut s’établir qu’a lissue de lAffaire Turco-Egyptienne. C’est donc 
cette affaire qu’il faut finir avant de passer a la signature avec la France. 
Marcher différemment ce serait créer un embarras, dont le moindre ineon- 
vénient ne serait pas celui d’enchevétrer les positions de maniére a ce que 
personne ne trouverait plus moyen de se reconnaitre; Phonneur des 
Quatre Cours serait, a notre avis, compromis, parce qu’alors elles 
auraient lair de ne point avoir pu conduire 4 terme une entreprise dont 
elles se sont chargées a la face de ’Europe. 

4°. Aprés avoir ainsi séparé d’une maniére distincte les objets en 
instance, et les avoir classés selon leur ordre naturel, nous assignons la 
premiére place dans l’action des Quatre Cours, a la terminaison de |’ Affaire 
Turco-Egyptienne, et la seconde a la signature de la Convention entre les 
Cing Cours d’une part et la Porte de l’autre part. Ce qu’on fera pour 
hater la conclusion de la premiére de ces affaires servira aussi a rap- 
procher celle de la seconde. Renverser cet ordre logique des choses, ce 
serait commettre une faute et s’exposer a toutes les conséquences qu’elle 
entrainerait. 

Tl me reste encore ’ exposer ici notre sentiment sur le moment le plus 
opportun pour provoquer la signature de la France, et voici ce que nous 
pensons 4 cet égard: 

Les Quatre Cours viennent de faire une démarche serrée a Constanti- 
nople, pour engager le Divan a prescrire 4 Méhémet Ali des conditions 
que les Quatre Cours jugent les plus rationnelles, et cela dans lintérét 
méme de la Porte, comme aussi parce que ces conditions sont les plus con- 
formes aux stipulations du 15 Juillet. La Porte devra prendre un parti a 
Végard des plus récentes manifestations des Puissances ses alliées; et ce 
parti sera—je le regarde comme certain—conforme a leurs voeux. _ 

Quand la réponse affirmative du Divan sera arrivée a la connaissance 
des Cours, alors elles feront bien d’insister, sans attendre la réponse du 
Pacha d’Egypte, sur la signature de l'Acte relatif 4 la cloture des détroits. 
Nous fondons ce sentiment sur le principe, que les Quatre Cours n’ont 
d’arrangemens 4 prendre qu’avec la Porte et non avec Méhémet Ali, lequel 
n’a, a leurs yeux, d’autre existence que celle d’un sujet du Sultan. Le 
jour donc ot les parties principales se seront définitivement entendues entre 
elles, ’affaire sera arrivée Asa fin. Si Méhémet Ali devait ne pas obéir a son 
Souverain, ce serait alors lui qui commencerait une affaire nouvelle, et cette 
affaire pourrait étre traitée, comme toutes les affaires, sous Pégide de la h- 
berté du mouvement des Cours. Quant Ala ligne de pensées et de conduite 
que la nétre suivrait dans cette hypothése, je n’ai pas besoin de vous la dé- 
velopper. Elle sera conforme aux principes qui servent invariablement de 
guide a notre politique ; ces principes, dont les deux derni¢res années ont 
offert de nouvelles preuves, ne peuvent étre mis en doute nulle part. 

. Recevez, &e., 
(Signé) METTERNICH. 


312 


428 


(Translation.) ; us 
Vienna, April 23, 1841. 

THE ordinary post from Constantinople has brought me the annexed 
reports from the Internuncio. They cause me to hope that the Porte will 
have adopted the advice of its Allies, as soon as that shall have been 
offered to it by the Representatives of the Four Courts. On the 7th of 
April, Lord Ponsonby had not yet explained himself towards his Col- 
leagues; but as he had the day before sent a messenger to London, by 
whom he announced to his Court that he would act in conformity with 
his instructions, I deduce from this disposition a favourable omen for an 
understanding between the Divan and the Powers. 

I likewise send you annexed two instructions which I addressed to the 
Internuncio on the 19th and 20th of April; they are sufficient to acquaint 
you exactly with our way of judging of the present state of affairs. 

I received on the 20th your Highness’s reports of the 10th, as well as 
a despatch from Count Appony of the 12th of this month. As that Am- 
bassador will not have failed to apprize you directly, Mon Prince, of the 
explanations which have taken place between him and M. Guizot on the 
subject of the signature of the initialed Act, it only remains for me to 
acquaint you with our opinion as to the season for the French signature. 
_ We, for our part, are in no wise in a hurry to see that signature 
affixed to an Act, to the tenour of which the French Cabinet is already 
bound by having initialed it. We should even find it more inconvenient 
than advantageous that the Convention should be signed before the agree- 
ment between the Four Powers and the Porte was definitively settled, and 
that for the reason, that if the settlement of this agreement has up to the 
present time met with difficulties as between the Four Courts and the 
Divan, the junction of a Fifth Court, instead of facilitating the task, could 
only render it more difficult. ) : 

Thus, impressed as we are with this conviction, you have never seen 
us press for the signature of the French Cabinet, but rather for the termi- 
nation of the Turco-Egyptian quarrel. It is evident that the signature of 
-the Convention relative to the closing of the Straits, has no direct 
-bearing on the Turco-Egyptian business. I request you, Mon Prince, as 
also the Baron de Neumann, not to deceive yourselves in this respect. ‘It 
is a question of two affairs distinct in their nature, and which have no 
other connection than that of the point at which they will very naturally 
meet together. By confounding these affairs a door would be opened to 
jnore than one danger, and it is not our habit to create dangers for 
amusement. 

That which is truly of importance, and to which therefore our constant 
efforts have been directed, is, that the Turco-Egyptian Affair should be 
brought to its end within the terms of the Convention of the 15th of J uly. 
We desire that, because it is consistent with our habitual course of pro- 
ceeding to conclude the affairs in which we are engaged, being convinced 
that when the conclusion of an affair is not clearly marked, new affairs 
result from it which are beyond the reach of any possible calculation. In 
order that our Plenipotentiaries in London may comprehend our whole 
Meaning with regard to what we consider desirable in the present state 
of things, I will briefly state that meaning in the following points which I 
will endeavour clearly to define :— 

1°. We admit the existence of two affairs, distinct in their nature, but 
blending themselves together at the point at which they arrive. 
| One of these affairs is what still remains of the Turco-Egyptian 
Question. It is placed between the Four Courts and the Porte, and its 
limits are marked out by the Acts of the 15th of July, of the 14th of 
November, and 17th of December, 1840, by the Collective Note of the 30th 
of January, and the decisions of the 5th of March, 1841. The other affair 
is the signature of the Convention relative to the closing of the Straits, 
which is to be effected between the Five Courts and the Divan. 
2°, The two affairs should not be confounded with each other, seeing 
that they are essentially different. In consequence of its voluntary isola- 
tion from the Treaty of July 15 and from its immediate results, the French 


429 


Government has not to interpose in the Turco-Egyptian Affair properly 
so called. It does not even desire to do so; and jf the case were other- 
wise, we should see a serious inconvenience in its doing so. The repug- 
- hance of the French Cabinet does not rest, in the present occasion, on an 
active political calculation ; it results from the feeling that by entering’ 
Anto the affair at the present time, it would involve itself in a position 
which could not be sustained by the existing administration. The present 
Cabinet is prudent, in a word, because it would be impossible for it not to 
be so; and this constrained position will, in our opinion, prove advanta- 
geous to the Four Powers and to the Porte, if they know how to bring toa 
successful issue the undertaking of the 15th of July ; but this same position 
cannot but turn out to their disadvantage, if they know not how to attain 
the object which they have proposed to themselves in the face of Europe, 
and for the support of which they have employed efforts which have been 
crowned with such distinguished real success. 
3°. The concurrence of France in the matter of the Straits has, in 
itself, scarcely any other value than that of being the completion of the 
grand work of the 15th of July. That concurrence offers, however, the 
only mode of extricating France (to her advantage as well as to that of 
Europe) from her isolation. Such being the truth with regard to the sig- 
nature of the Convention relative to the closing of the Straits, what is 
there in common between this affair and the definitive settlement of the 
respective attitudes of the Sultan and of the Pasha of Egypt? It is clear 
that a connection cannot be established between the two questions, except 
at the close of the Turco-Egyptian affair. Itis then this affair which must 
be finished before proceeding to the signature with France. To take a 
different course would be to occasion an embarrassment, of which the 
least inconvenience would not be that of entangling the positions in such 
a manner as that no one would have the means of knowing where he was: 
the honour of the Four Courts would, in our opinion, be compromised, 
because in that case they would have the appearance of having been 
unable to bring to an end an enterprize which they undertook in the face 
of Europe. : sores 
4°. After having thus distinctly separated the objects in question, and 
having classed them according to their natural order, we assign the first 
place in the action of the Four Courts to the conclusion of the ‘Turco- 
Egyptian affair, and the second to the signature of the Convention 
between the Five Courts on the one part, and the Porte on the other part. 
What shall be done to hasten the conclusion of the first of these affairs, 
will serve also to bring on that of the second. ‘To invert this logical order 
of things, would be to commit a fault, and to expose ourselves to all the 
‘consequences which it would entail. highehis 
It still remains for me to explain in this place our opinion as to the 
most seasonable moment for calling for the signature of France, and this 
is what we think in that respect :-— ; 
The Four Courts have just taken a decided step at Constantinople in 
order to induce the Divan to prescribe to Mehemet conditions which the 
Four Courts consider the most reasonable, and that even in the interest of 
the Porte, as also because those conditions are the most in conformity 
with the stipulations of the 15th of July. The Porte will have to take a 
course with regard to the most recent manifestations of the Powers its 
allies; and that course will be, I consider it certain, conformable to their 
wie hen the answer of the Divan in the affirmative shall have come to 
the knowledge of the Courts, then they will do well, without waiting for 
the answer of the Pasha of Egypt, to insist upon the signature of the Act 
relative to the closing of the Straits. We rest this opinion upon the prin- 
ciple that the Four Courts have to make arrangements only with the 
Porte, and not with Mehemet Ali, who in their view, has no other exist- 
ence than that of a subject of the Sultan. On the day, therefore, on which 
the principal parties shall have come to a definitive understanding among 
themselves, the affair will have reached its termination. If Mehemet Ah 
should not obey his Sovereign, he would then be the person who would 
commence a new affair, and that affair might be dealt with, as all affairs, 


430 


under the safeguard of the freedom of action of the Courts. As to 
the line of opinion and of conduct which our Court would in that 
contingency pursue, I have no need to explain it to you. It will be in 
conformity with the principles which invariably guide our policy ; those 
principles whereof the two last years have afforded fresh proofs can 
nowhere be the subject of doubt. 


No. 269. 
Lord Beauwale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received May 26.) 


My Lord, Vienna, May 3, 1841. 

BOGHOS BEY has addressed a letter to Marshal Marmont, express- 
ing a wish on the part of Mehemet Ali to be made acquainted with the 
opinions of Prince Metternich upon his (the Pasha’s) position. 

This letter having been shown to the Prince, he has written one to 
the Marshal containing the required exposition of them, and has furnished 
me with a copy of it for communication to your Lordship. This I have 
the honour to inclose. 

I have, &c., 


(Signed) BEAUVALE. 


Inclosure in No. 269. 
Prince Metternich to Marshal Marmont. 


Mon cher Maréchal, Vienne, le 27 Avril, 1841. 


JE vous remercie de la lecture que vous m’avez permis de prendre 
de la lettre de Boghos Bey. Je vous dirai franchement ce que j’en pense. 

L’année derniére a porté de grandes lecons 4 Méhémet Ali, et elles 
devraient lui marquer la ligne qu’il doit suivre. Il parait quil n’en a 
pas encore tiré ce profit, car la lettre de Boghos Joussouf est entachée 
d’idées politiques, et c’est tout juste la politique qui est élément que doit 
fuir Méhémet Ali, L’EKurope veut une Egypte province de I’Empire 
Ottoman, et non une Egypte formant, sous le masque de la soumission, 
un Etat indépendant et agissant comme un dissolvant sur cet Empire, 
La clé de l’énigme est la et la chercher autre part c’est se tromper. Ce 
que Méhémet Alia désiré, il la obtenu. L’hérédité dans le Pachalic a 
été accordée a sa famille. Ce que certaines conditions du firman d’inves- 
titure ont renfermé de peu pratique sera réformé, car la Porte est 
intéressée 4 ce que des embarras ne surgissent a toute heure entre elle 
et les Pachas d’Egypte. Les Puissances de |’Europe ont le méme intérét, 
et le sens commun me dit qu'il est également celui de la famille de 
Méhémet Ali. La question n’est pas dans tel ou tel détail, mais elle se 
trouve dans l’ensemble de la position. Si Méhémet Ali veut ce qu’admet 
la Porte et ce qu’avec elle ont admis les Puissances; s’il veut que sa 
famille soit investie de Vhérédité dans le gouvernement d’une province 
Ottomane ; il peut se dire qu’il a atteint son but. S’il veut une situation 
indépendante, s’il vise a établir la souveraineté dans sa famille, alors il se 
trouve en opposition non seulement avec la Porte, mais avec |’Europe 
entiére, et lui et sa succession périront dans l’enterprise. 

Voila ce que je pense de la position, et ce que j’en pense est assis sur 
de la trés-saine pratique. 

Mille sincéres hommages. 


(Signé) METTERNICH. 


(Translation.) 
My Dear Marshal, Vienna, April 27, 1841. 


I THANK you for having allowed me to read the letter of Boghos 
Bey. I will tell you frankly what I think of it. 


431 


_ The last year has given great lessons to Mehemet Ali, and they ought 
to indicate to him the course which he should follow. It appears that he 
has not yet profited by them; and the letter of Boghos Youssouf is 
fainted with political notions, and politics are just the very thing which 
Mehemet Ali ought to avoid. Europe wishes for an Egypt, a. province 
of the Ottoman Empire, and not for an Egypt forming, under the mask of 
submission, an independent State, and thus acting as a solvent upon that 
Empire. The key of the enigma is there, and it is a mistake to look for it 
elsewhere. What Mehemet Ali has desired, he has obtained. The here- 
ditary succession in the Pashalic has been granted to his family. That 
which is contained in certain conditions of the firman of investiture of a 
nature little practical will be amended; for the Porte is interested that 
embarrassments should not continually rise up between it and the Pashas 
of Egypt. The Powers of Europe have the same interest, and common 
sense tells me that it is equally the interest of Mehemet Ali’s family. The 
question does not consist in this or that detail, but in the whole position 
taken together. If Mehemet Ali desires what the Porte assents to, and 
what the Powers have equally assented to, if he wishes that his family 
should be invested with the hereditary succession in the Government of a 
Turkish province, he may say that he has attained his object. If he 
desires an independent position, if he aims at establishing Sovereignty in 
his family, then he is in a state of opposition not only to the Porte, 
but to the whole of Europe, and he and his succession will perish in 
the enterprize. 

This is my opinion of the state of things, and my opinion of it rests 
on what is soundest in practice. 
A thousand sincere respects, ; 
(Signed) METTERNICH. 


No. 270. 
Lord Beauvale to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received May 26.) 


My Lord, Vienna, May 19, 1841. 

PRINCE Metternich highly approves of the answer to Chekib 
Effendi, as well as of the instruction to Lord Ponsonby of the 11th of 
May; and he sends orders to Baron Stiirmer, by the present. occasion, to 


conform his conduct thereto. 
! I have, &c., 
(Signed) BEAUVALE. 


No. 271. 
The Marquess of Clanricarde to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received 
May 28.) 
(Extract.) St. Petersburgh, May 14, 1841. 


YESTERDAY I had audiences to take leave of their Imperial 
Majesties, and of other Members of the Imperial Family. 

With the Emperor I had the honour of a long conversation, during 
the whole course of which, His Imperial Majesty evinced the same good 
will and cordiality towards Her Majesty’s Government that it has been 
my duty to report to your Lordship on former occasions. ; 

After renewing the expression of His Majesty’s personal sentiments 
towards the Queen, and of his friendly feelings towards England, the 
Emperor dismissed me in the most kind and flattering manner. 


epee eee a 


432 


No. 272. 


Mr. Bulwer to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received May 30.) 


(Extract.) Paris, May 28, 1841. 


I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Lordship’s 
despatches to the 25th of May. : 

M. Guizot read to me this morning a despatch from M. de Bour- 
queney, in which that gentleman stated, that he had informed your 
Lordship that his Government would be now ready to give him the 
powers for signing the Convention of March, on your Lordship’s affirming 
to him that you considered the Treaty of July was abrogated by the 
Porte’s recent Memorandum ; and that your Lordship had thereupon, 
with great frankness, replied, “that you deemed yourself under such 
circumstances bound to say to M. de Bourqueney, that, though you confi- 
dently expected that the firman founded upon the memorandum alluded 
to would be accepted by Mehemet Ali, and, consequently, that the Treaty 
in question would thus be at an end, you would not take upon yourself, 
without having received Mehemet’s answer, to say that it was so:’— 
‘Under which circumstances,” said M. de Bourqueney, ‘‘I could only 
observe, in compliance with all my instructions, that until the Alliance 
created by the Treaty of July was dissolved, France could not be a party 
to the Convention of March, which, in fact, was intended to be a docu- 
ment signed by the Five Powers, in order to show that the Four Powers 
were no longer acting by themselves.” 

‘“T have no remark to make on this,” said M. Guizot, “ for my own 
Part except. to thank Lord Palmerston for the frankness and loyalty of 

is communication; but I wish you to observe that it is not I who now 
refuse to sign the Additional Treaty on the plea that Mehemet Ali may 
not consent to the firman (the conditions contained in which L consider 
reasonable); the objection and the delay proceed from the Government of 
Great Britain. I hope that this will not encourage Mehemet Ali, or lead 
him to think, that by refusing the terms proposed to him he may create 
dissensions amongst the European Powers, and great care must be taken 
that this is not the case. 

“ As for myself, I shall write this day to M. de Chabot, telling him 
what has occurred for his own information, but warning him that he is 
not to communicate it to Mehemet Ali, but to tell him simply that France 
urges him in the strongest manner to accept the Sultan’s propositions, 
and cannot afford him any protection or support of any kind, if he does 
not.” 

I observed to M. Guizot, after stating how much I was satisfied by 
his last-mentioned communication, that though some risk might possibly 
arise from the Viceroy’s imagining that the Five Powers were not 
agreed as to the firman, their names not immediately appearing to the 
document which was to be the signal of their union, I could yet see 
another difficulty in the opposite case: for, supposing that Mehemet were 
told that the Alliance of July was broken up, at the same time that the 
Sultan’s offers were made to him, might he not say to himself, (if these 
offers were disagreeable to him,) ‘all power of compelling me to be 
reasonable is at an end?’ and might he not, consequently, refuse these 
offers; and what then was to occur? No one could say that the objects 
contemplated by the Treaty of July were attained, and yet the Treaty of 
July would be over. | 

M. Guizot admitted the truth of this, and said that there were 
undoubtedly difficulties both ways; and that, for his own part, he was in 
no hurry about the matter, but was only anxious to have it clearly under- 
stood, that he had fulfilled his pledge when he said that whenever France 
thought that the terms offered to the Pasha were just. and reasonable, 
she should never wait for his consent or opinion in order to declare them 
so. | then asked M. Guizot whether he feared that any difficulty would 
arise on the part of Mehemet Ali as to the application of the general 
laws of the Ottoman Empire to Eyypt, and he said, “No; the only 


difficulty he foresaw regarded the tribute; that he had always hitherto 
understood that this was to be left as a matter to be debated between the 
Sultan and his vassal, but that he now heard that the firman was to 
contain a specified sum; and he feared that if this sum were extravagant, 
the Pasha would not consent to pay it.” 


SS 
No. 273. 


Viscount Palmerston to Lord Beauvale. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, June 2, 1841. 


J HAVE received your Excellency’s despatch of the 3rd ultimo, 
and copy of the very excellent letter which Prince Metternich has 
addressed to Marshal Marmont on the position of Mehemet Ali. That 
letter describes accurately, logically, and in a few words, the real position 
of Mehemet Ali, and cannot fail to have a powerful effect on his conduct. 

Tam, &c., 


(Signed) PALMERSTON. 


No. 274. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received June 4.) 


My Lord, : Therapia, May 11, 1841. 

THE Minister for Foreign Affairs has expressed his satisfaction with 
the plan proposed by the Representatives of the Four Powers for the con- 
duct of the affairs with Mehemet Ali; but the firman and vizirial letter 
have not yet been communicated to me, and I believe are not yet fully 


prepared. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No. 275. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received June 4.) 


My Lord, Therapia, May 12, 1841. 
I HAVE this day been informed by the dragoman, that he thinks 
Rifaat Pasha has the intention to delay the confidential communication to 
the Representatives of the new firman about Mehemet Ali, until the Porte 
shall have again heard from Chekib Effendi. 

The dragoman says he has reminded Rifaat Pasha of the advice I 
gave the Sublime Porte to issue the firman without delay, &c. 

I have this day instructed the dragoman to tell Rifaat Pasha, that if 
any delay take place in the above matter, I shall think it necessary to call 
upon my colleagues officially for their concurrence and support in making 
an inquiry at the Sublime Porte what may be the reasons of the delay of 
the firman, &c., in order that we may he enabled to acquaint our Govern- 


ments with the cause assigned for it by the Sublime Porte. 
I have, &c., 


(Signed) =. PONSONBY. 


A434. 


No. 276. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received June 12.) 


My Lord, Therapia, May 17, 1841. 
1 HAVE received information from Mr. Chasseaud, the British Vice- 


Consul at Alexandria, that Mehemet Ali has given orders for building two 


new ships of the line. I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


LT 


No. 277. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received June 12.) 


My Lord, . Therapia, May 22, 1841. 


I HAVE the honour to inclose copy of my reply to Rifaat Pasha, when 
he first communicated to me the new firman and requested me to give my 
approbation of it in writing. Your Lordship will observe, that I confined 
myself to an approval of the three points,—Succession, Tribute, and | 
Military Rank;—points upon which the Four Powers have spoken 
decidedly. ; 

I inclose also copy of the answer made by the Internuncio on the 
same occasion. ve 

I understand that the Russian and Prussian Ministers have sent 
similar answers, but I have not a copy. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 277. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Mr. F. Pisani, 


Sik, Therapia, May 18, 1841. 
YOU will thank his Excellency Rifaat Pasha for the communication 
of the projet for a new firman intended by the Sublime Porte to be 
addressed to the Pasha of Egypt, and you will tell him I am happy to see 
therein, that the Sublime Porte has acceded to the wishes expressed by the 
August Allies of the Sultan, and has made the modifications in the regu- 
lations concerning the Succession, the Tribute, and Military Rank. 
| I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 277. 
Baron de Stiirmer to the Baron de Testa. 


(Extrait.) 19 Mai, 1841. 

J’AT lu avec la plus scrupuleuse attention le projet du nouveau firman 
que la Sublime Porte se propose d’adresser au Pacha d’Egypte et sur 
lequel Son Excellence M. le Ministre des Affaires Etrangéres voudrait 
connaitre mon opinion. Les modifications sur le réglement de la Succes- 
sion, du Tribut, et des Avancemens Militaires, s’y trouvant insérées telles 
qwelles avaient été proposées par les Cours Alliées, je ne doute pas qu’il 
ne soit accueilli par elles avec une bien vive satisfaction. 

Quant aux autres points du firman, qui tous sont du ressort de 
administration intérieure de la Sublime Porte, il appartient 4 l’autorité de 
Sa Hautesse seule de les régler 4 son gré et de prendre en considération 
ou non les voeux que Méhémet Ali a soumis a ce sujet 4 sa décision. 


435 


(Translation.) 


_ May 19, 1841. 

I HAVE read with scrupulous attention the draft of the new firman 
which the Sublime Porte proposes to address to the Pasha of Egypt, and 
on which his Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs would wish to 
know my opinion. The modifications as to the regulation of the succession, 
of the tribute, and of the military promotions, being inserted therein, such 
as they had been proposed by the Allied Courts, [ doubt not that it will 
be received by them with very lively satisfaction. 

With regard to the other points of the firman, which are all connected 
with the internal administration of the Sublime Porte, it appertains to 
the authority of His Highness alone to regulate them at his pleasure, and 
to take into consideration or not the wishes which Mehemet Ali has on 
that matter submitted to his decision. 


SA SSS SSS SSS SSS SS Sn eC ac 


No. 278. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received June 12.) 


(Extract. | Therapia, May 22, 1841. 


I HAVE to acquaint your Lordship that my Colleagues did not mean to 
approve of my plan which is reported in my despatch of May 3, and that the 
answers I received from them were not intended to express the meaning 
which they appeared to me to convey; but they continued to be of opinion, 
that the Sublime Porte ought to answer Mehemet Ali’s letter by a firman ; 
I found that the Ottoman Ministers were of the same opinion, and I 
therefore determined to cease to press the adoption of my views at the 
Conference fixed for this day, and I acted accordingly. 

The Conference met, composed of the Four Representatives, the 
Ottoman Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Seraskier, and Riza Pasha; 
the new firman was read, and some inquiries made to ascertain the sense 
of some passages; after which his Excellency Rifaat Pasha requested the 
Representatives to declare their approbation of the firman in writing. 

The Representatives were of opinion that not being the authors of 
the firman, they ought not to assume so great a responsibility, but they 
consented to say in writing, that they found nothing in it to object to, and 
a paper was signed by us all to that effect, a copy of which I inclose. I 
objected to nothing, because the Sublime Porte is acknowledged to be the 
proper and only authority to determine the nature and extent of the 
restrictions to be imposed upon the powers of the Pasha of Egypt. 

I think your Lordship will see in what has been done by the Porte a 

roof of the desire by which it is animated to gratify the wishes of the 
Sultan’s Allies. The Porte seems to me to have done more than it was 
advised by the Great Powers to do, in the way of concession, and, in 
so far as the Porte is a party, the question with Mehemet Ali may be 
considered as settled. 

The firman will be sent to Alexandria immediately, accompanied by a 
letter from the Grand Vizier, explanatory (as I am told) of the conduct of 
the Sublime Porte. 

I inclose a copy of the firman hastily made, and which may have in 
it some slight inaccuracies. | will forward an authenticated copy 
without delay. 


Inclosure 1 in No. 278. 


Note signed by the Representatives of the Four Powers regarding the 
new Firman. 


NOUS Soussignés, Représentans des Quatre Puissances Alliées de 
la Sublime Porte, déclarons 4 sa demande expresse, qu’ayant pris con- 
3K 2 


436 

naissance de nouveau’ du projet du firman d’investiture 4 envoyer au 
Pacha d’Egypte, Méhémet Ali Pacha, nous n’y avons rien trouvé qui nous 
ait paru devoir donner lieu 4 une objection quelconque de notre part, et 
quil ne nous reste plus, en conséquence, rien 2d lui demander si ce nest 
quelle fasse parvenir ce firman 4 son adresse le plus promptement 
possible. a. 

Fait 4 Emirghian, 4 Vhétel de son Excellence Monsieur le Ministre 
des Affaires Etrangéres de la Sublime Porte, Méhémed Rifaat Pacha, ce 


22 Mai, 1841. 
(Signé) STURMER. 
PONSONBY. 
KGENIGSMARK. 
TITOW. 


(Translation.) 


WE, the Undersigned, Representatives of the Four Powers, Allies of 
the Sublime Porte, declare at its express demand that, having again taken 
into consideration the draft of the firman of investiture to be sent to the 
Pasha of Egypt, Mehemet Ali Pasha, we have not found therein anything 
which it has appeared to us ought to give occasion for any objection what- 
ever on our part, and that there does not remain, in consequence, anything 
for us to ask of it, except that it should forward this firman to its address 
as quickly as possible. 

Done at Emirghian, at the house of his Excellency the Minister for 
Foreign Affairs of the Sublime Porte, Mehemed Rifaat Pasha, the 22nd of 


May, 1841. 
(Signed) STURMER, 
PONSONBY, 
KCENIGSMARK, 
TITOW. 
Inclosure 2 in No. 278. 
Firman du 13 Février, 1841*. Nouveau Firman. 


(Traduction.) 


L’ACTE de soumission que tu 
viens de faire, les assurances de 
fidélité et de dévouement que tu as 
données, et les intentions droites et 
sincéres que tu as manifestées tant 
a mon égard que dans les intéréts 
de ma Sublime Porte, sont parvenues 
a ma connaissance souveraine et 
m’ont été fort agréables. 

En conséquence, et le zéle et la 
sagacité qui te caractérisent, ainsi 
que l’expérience et les connaissances 
que tu as acquises dans les affaires 
de Egypte pendant le long espace 
de tems que tu as occupé le poste 
de Gouverneur de Egypte, donnant 
lieu 4 croire que tu auras acquis 
des droits 4 la faveur et a la con- 
fiance que je t’accorde, c’est-a-dire, 
que tu en connaitras toute la portée 
et toute la reconnaissance que tu 
devras en avoir, que tu t’appliqueras 
a faire en sorte que ces dispositions 


* Tout ce qui n’est pas souligné dans ce firman se trouve dans le nouveau firman, et tout ce 
qui est souligné est changé ou supprimé ou modifié dans le nouveau firman. 


437 


passent a tes fils et a tes neveux, 
je_ t’accorde le gouvernement de 
Egypte dans ses anciennes limites 
telles qu’on les trouve dans la carte 
qui t’est envoyée par mon Grand 
Vizir actuellement en fonctions, 
munie d’un cachet, avec le privilége 
additionnel de Vhérédité et avec les 
conditions suivantes : 

Désormais, quand le poste sera 
vacant, le gouvernement de lI’ Egypte 
sera conféré a celui de tes enfans males 
existans que jaurais préféré et élu, et 
ce systéme sera observé également a 
Pégard de ses enfans males. 

Si jamais le destin voudra que la 
ligne masculine soit éteinte, comme 
dans ce cas ma Sublime Porte 
devra conférer le gouvernement de 
Egypte a une autre personne, les 
enfans males nés des filles des 
Gouverneurs de ’Egypte n’auront 
aucun droit, aucune capacité légale 
a la succession au Gouvernement. 

Dorénavant, celui dentre tes enfans 
qui sera élu au gouvernement del Egypte 
devra se rendre en personne a Constanti- 
nople pour y recevoir linvestiture de son 
poste. 

Bien que les Pachas d’Egypte 
ayent obtenu le privilége de Vhéré- 
dité, ils doivent cependant étre con- 
sidérés, quant ala préséance, comme 
étant sur un pied d’égalité avec les 
autres Vizirs, ils seront traités 
comme les autres Vizirs de ma Sub- 
lime Porte, et recevront les mémes 
titres que lon donne aux autres 
Vizirs quand on leur écrit. 

Les ordonnances utiles proclamées par 
mon Hatti Shériff Impérial de Gulhané, 
tous les réglemens farts et a faire par ma 
Sublime Porte, tous les traités con- 
clus et 4 conclure entre ma Sublime 
Porte et les Puissances amies, seront 
complétement mis 4 exécution dans 
la Province de Egypte aussi ; 

En Egypte, tous les impéts, tous 
les revenus, seront percus et re- 
cueillis en mon nom _ souverain; 
attendu cependant que les Egyptiens 
aussi sont les sujets de ma Sublime 
Porte, et afin qu’un jour ils ne soient 
pas vexés, la dime, les droits, et les 
autres impéts qui seront percus, le 
seront sur les mémes régles qui seront 
en vigueur dans les autres pays de ma 
Sublime Porte. 


Sur le montant annuel des droits de ' 


dowane, de la dime, des impéts, et de 
toutes les autres especes de revenus, on en 
prélévera d’abord, c’est-d-dire, sans 
défalquer aucune dépense, la quatrieme 
partie pour compte de ma Sublime Porte. 


le gouvernement de IlEgypte 
écherra en ligne droite, de Vainé a 
Painé, dans la race masculine parmi 
les fils et les petits-fils. Quant a 
leur nomination, elle se fera de la 
part de ma Sublime Porte. 


Les principes fondés sur les lois 
de la sireté dé la vie, de la sireté. 
de la propriété, et de la conservation 
de Vhonneur, principes consacrés 
par les ordonnances salutaires de 
mon Hatti Shériff de Gulhané ; 


et tous les réglemens faits et a 
faire par ma Sublime Porte seront 
aussi mis en pratique en Egypte, en 
les conciliant le mieux qu’on pourra 
avec les circonstances locales et les 
principes de la justice et de l’équité. 


conformément au systéme équi- 
table adopté par ma Sublime Porte, 
et l’on prendra soin de payer, dés 
que le temps du payement sera _ 
venu, sur les droits de douane, sur 
la capitation, sur les dimes, sur les 
revenus et les autres produits de 
la Province de l’Egypte, le tribut 
annuel dont Je quantum est inséré 


438. 


Les autres trois quarts sont laissés afin 
quiis servent a faire face aux frais du 
recouvrement, d ceuw de Vadministration 
intérieure, des établissemens mialitaires, 
et pour le trésor particulier des Pachas 
d’ Egypte, et pour le payement des vivres 
quil est dusage d’envoyer tous les ans 
en nature de Egypte aux deux Villes 
Saintes. 

Le quantum du tribut qui revient a 
ma Sublime Porte et le mode de la 
perception, sont executoires lespace de 
cing ans, &@ commencer de l'année 1257 
(Février, 1841), aprés cela, il sera loi- 
sible de faire a& cet égard de meilleurs 
arrangemens daprés Vétat futur de 
VEgypte et les exigences des temps; 
considerant que c’est un devoir pour ma 
Sublime Porte de connattre au juste le 
montant réel des revenus annuels et le 
mode de perception des dimes et des 
autres impéts a prendre des habitans, et 
attendu que cette connaissance ne peut 
guere s’obtenr que par létablissement 
dun controle, on prendra des mesures 
conformes auw ordres que je donnerai a 
cet egard. 

Comme ma Sublime Porte a pris 
la résolution d’améliorer la monnaie, 
qui est l’Ame des opérations de la 
société, et de le faire de maniére a 
ce que désormais il ne puisse y avoir 
de la variation ni dans laloi, ni 
dans le prix, je permets que lon 
batte monnaie en Egypte; mais les 
monnaies en or et en argent que je 
te permets de battre, porteront mon 
nom, et seront tout a fait semblables, 
sous les rapports du titre, des prix 
et de la forme, a celles que l’on 
frappe ici. 

En temps de paix, 18,000 hommes 
suffront pour le service intérieur de 
la province de l’Egypte; il ne sera 
pas permis d’en augmenter le nom- 
bre. Mais vai que les troupes de 
terre et de mer de V’Egypte sont 
instituées pour le service de ma 
Sublime Porte, il sera permis, en 
temps de guerre, de les porter au 
nombre qui aura été jugé convenable 
par ma Sublime Porte. 

On a adopté le principe que les 
soldats employés dans les autres 
parties de mes états serviront pen- 
dant cing ans, au bout duquel terme 
ils seront échangés contre des re- 
crues. Cela etant, il faut qua cet 
égard Von suive le méme systéme en 
Egypte aussi. Par conséquent, il faudra 
Former des soldats le plus récemment 
incorporés et pris dans les corps des 
troupes LEgyptiennes 20,000 hommes, 
auaquels on appliquera ensuite le principe 


et précisé dans un autre firman 
Impérial. 


Etant d’usage d’envoyer tous les 
ans de l’Egypte des vivres en nature 
aux deux Villes Saintes, on con- 
tinuera a envoyer a chaque endroit 
séparément les vivres et les autres 
objets, quels qu’ils puissent étre, © 
qui y ont été envoyés jusqu’a présent. 


Cela étant, il faudrait, qu’a cet 
égard l’on suivit le méme systéme 
en Egypte aussi. Mais par rapport 
a la durée du service, on s’adaptera 
aux dispositions des habitans, en 
observant a leur égard ce que l’équité 
exige. 


439 


\ 


du temps de service & compter du jour 
quils y ont été admis. De ce corps 
18,000 hommes seront employés au 
service interieur de l Egypte, et les 2,000 
hommes seront employés ici. Et comme 
la cinquiéme partie de ces 20,000 hom- 
mes devra étre remplacée tous les ans, 
on prendra chaque année sur la popula- 
tion de |’ Egypte, en tirant légalement au 
sort, en sy prenant mon humanité, et 
en y observant la plus parfaite impar- 
tiahité, 4000 hommes, dont 3600 hommes 
seront retenus en Kgypte, et les 400 
envoyés a Constantinople. Les soldats 
qui auront été les premiers a entrer au 
service, soit ri soit la, et qui auront 
accompli leur cinquiéme année de service, 
seront renvoyés a leurs pays respectifs, 
et ceux qui auront une fois accompli le 
terme de service, ne seront plus enrélés. 

Il peut y avoir une différence, & cause 
du clumat, dans T étoffe servant a Vhabil- 
lement des troupes en Egypte, mais wl ne 
dowt en avoir aucune ni dans luniforme, 
ni dans la coupe des habits, ni dans les 
marques distinctives des grades, nu dans 
les drapeaux, entre ces troupes la et les 
autres troupes de ma Sublime Porte. 

Les troupes a employer sur les vats- 
seaux Lgyptiens, officiers et soldats, 
auront tout-a-fatt le méme habillement et 
les mémes marques distinctwes de leurs 
grades que les troupes dicr; les bati- 
mens porteront le méme pavillon que 
ceux d’rct. 

Le Gouverneur d’Egypte nom- 
mera les officiers de terre et de 
marine jusqu’au grade de Col-Agassi, 
grade immédiatement au-dessous de celua 
de Chef de Bataillon. Quant aux 
nominations aux grades supérieurs a 
celui de Col-Agassi, il faudra absolu- 
ment en demander la permission et 
prendre mes ordres la-dessus. 

Dorénavant les Pachas d’Egypte 
ne pourront pas faire construire des 
batimens de guerre sans en avoir 
demandé la permission de la Sublime 
Porte, et en avoir obtenu une auto- 
risation claire et positive. 

Attendu que chacune des condi- 
tions arrétées comme ci-dessus est 
adhérente au privilége de ’hérédité, 
siune seule d’elles n’est pas exécutée, 
ce privilége d’hérédité sera aussitét 
aboli et annulé. 

Telle étant ma volonté supreme 
sur tous les points ci-dessus énoncés, 
toi, tes enfans et tes descendans, re- 
connaissans de cette haute faveur 
souveraine, vous vous empresserez 
toujours 4 exécuter scrupuleusement 


les conditions établies, vous vous. 


garderez bien d’y contrevenir, vous 


X 


Il sera envoyé chaque année & 
Constantinople 400 hommes pour 
remplacer d’autres. 


r 


Il n’y aura aucune différence entre 
les marques distinctives et les dra- 
peaux des troupes qui seront em- 
ployés la et les marques distinctives 
et les drapeaux des autres troupes 
de ma Sublime Porte. Les officiers 
de marine Egyptienne auront les 
mémes marques distinctives de 
grades, et les Egyptiens auront les 
mémes pavillons que les officiers et 
les batimens d’ici. 
de Colonel. 


Colonel, c’est-A-dire de Pachas 


Miri livi (Généraux de. Brigade) et. 


de Pachas Férik (Généraux de 
division). 


440 


aurez soin d’assurer le repos et la 
tranquillité des Egyptiens en les met- 
tant a l’abri de toutes injures et de 
toutes vexations, vous ferez des rap- 
ports ici et demanderez des ordres 
sur les affaires importantes qui con- 
cernent ces pays la, étant a ces fins 
que le présent firman Impérial qui 
est orné de mon rescrit Souverain a 
été écrit et vous est envoyé. 


(Translation.) 


Firman of February 13, 1841*. 

THE act of submission which 
thou hast just made, the assurances 
of fidelity and devotion which thou 
hast given, and the upright and sin- 
cere intentions which thou hast 
manifested, as well with regard to 
myself as in the interests of the Sub- 
lime Porte, have come to my sove- 
reign knowledge, and have been 
very agreeable to me. 

In consequence, and as the zeal 
and sagacity by which thou art cha- 
racterized, as likewise the experience 
and knowledge which thou hast ac- 
quired in the affairs of Egypt during 
the long space of time that thou hast 
held the post of Governor of Egypt, 
give reason to believe that thou hast 
acquired a title to the favour and 
to the confidence which I may grant 
to thee, that is to say, that thou wilt 
be sensible of their full extent, and all 
the gratitude which thou shouldst 
have for them, that thou wilt apply 
thyself to cause these feelings to de- 
scend to thy sons and thy posterity, 
I grant unto thee the Government 
of Egypt within its ancient bounda- 
ries, such as they are to be found 
in the map which is sent unto thee 
by my Grand Vizier now in office, 
with a seal affixed to it, together 
with the additional privilege of here- 
ditary succession, and with the fol- 
lowing conditions : 

Henceforth, when the post shall 
be vacant, the Government of Egypt 
shall be conferred upon that one of thy 
male children in being whom I may have 
preferred and selected, and this system 
shall be equally observed with regard to 
his male children. 

If it shall please Providence at 
any time that the male line should 
. become extinct, as in that case it 
will devolve upon my Sublime Porte 


* 


changed, suppressed or modified in the new firman. 


New Firman. 


the Government of Egypt shall de- 
scend in a direct line, from the elder 
to the elder, in the male race among 
the sons and grandsons, As regards 
their nomination, that shall be made 
by my Sublime Porte. bs 


All that is not underlined in this firman is in the new firman, and all that is underlined is 


441 


to confer the Government of Egypt 
on another person, the male chil- 
dren, issue of the daughters of the 
Governors of Egypt, shall possess 
no right to, no legal capacity for, the 
succession to the Government. 

Henceforth that person from among 
thy children who shall be elected to the 
Government of Egypt, will have to pro- 
ceed wm person to Constantinople, there 
to receive investiture of his office. 

Although the Pashas of Egypt 
have obtained the privilege of here- 
ditary succession, they still must be 
considered, as far as precedency is 
concerned, to be on a footing of 
equality with the other Viziers, they 
shall be treated like the other Viziers 
of my Sublime Porte, and they shall 
receive the same titles as are given 
to the other Viziers when they are 
written to. ; 

The salutary ordinances proclaimed, 
by my Imperial Hattt Sheriff of Gul- 
hané, all the regulations made, and to 
be made, by my Sublim® Porte, all the 
treaties concluded and to be con- 
cluded between my Sublime Porte 
and the friendly Powers, shall be 
completely executed in the province 
of Egypt likewise ; 

In Egypt, all the taxes, all the 
revenues, shall be levied and col- 
lected in my sovereign name; never- 
theless as the Egyptians are likewise 
the subjects of my Sublime Porte, 
and in order that they may not one 
day be oppressed, the tenths, the 
duties, and the other taxes which 
are levied there, shall be so according 
to the same rules as shall be in force in 
the other countries of my Sublime Porte. 

From the annual amount of the cus- 
toms-duties, the tenths, the taxes, and 
every other species of revenues, there shall 
be set apart in the first instance, that is 
to say, without deducting any expense, 
the fourth part for the account of my 
Sublime Porte. The other three-fourths 
are left in order that they may serve to 
meet the expenses of collection, those of 
the internal administration, of the mili- 
tary establishments, and for the private 
treasury of the Pashas of Egypt, and 
for the payment of the provisions which 
it is customary to send every year in kind 
Srom Egypt to the two Holy Cites. 

The amount of tribute which accrues 
to my Sublime Porte, and the mode of col- 
lection, are to be in force for five years, 
commencing from the year 1257 (Kebru- 
ary, 1841); after that, it shall be lawful 
to make in that respect better arrange- 
ments according to the future condition 


The principles founded on the 
laws of security of life, of the secu- 
rity of property, and the preserva- 
tion of honour, principles recorded 
in the salutary ordinances of my 
Hatti Sheriff of Gulhané ; 


and all the regulations made and to 
be made by my Sublime Porte shall 
also be put in practice in Egypt, re- 
conciling them in the best way pos- 
sible with the local circumstances 
and with the principles of justice 
and of equity. 


in conformity with the equitable 
system adopted by my Sublime 
Porte; and care shall be taken to 
pay, when the period for payment 
shall arrive, out of the customs-duties 
the capitation tax, the tenths, the 
revenues, and other produce of the 
province of Egypt, the annual tri- 
bute of which the amount is inserted 
and defined in another Imperial 
firman. : 


It being customary to send every 
year from Egypt provisions in kind 
to the two Holy Cities, the provisions 
and other articles, whatever they 
may be, which have up to this time 
been sent to each place separately 
shall continue to be sent thither. 


3 L 


442 


of Egypt, and the exigencies of the times; 
seeing that it 1s incumbent upon my Sub- 
lime Porte to know exactly the real 
amount of the annual revenues, and the 
mode of levying the tenths and other 
duties to be raised from the inhabitants, 
and considering that this knowledge can 
hardly be obtained except by the establish- 
ment of an office of control, measures 
shall be taken in conformity with the 
orders which I shall give in that respect. 

As my Sublime Porte has taken 
the resolution of improving the coin, 
which is the soul of the operations of 
society, and of taking measures so 
that henceforth there can be no va- 
riation either in the alloy, or in the 
value, I grant permission for money 
to be coined in Egypt; but the gold 
and silver monies which I permit 
thee to coin, shall bear my name, 
and shall resemble in all respects, as 
regards their determination, value, 
and form, the monies which «are 
coined here. 

In time of peace, 18,000 men will 
suffice for the internal service of the 
province of Egypt; it shall not be 
allowed to increase their numbers. 
But as the land and sea forces of 
Egypt are raised for the service of 
my Sublime Porte, it shall be allow- 
able, in time of war, to increase them 
to the number which shall be deemed 
suitable by my Sublime Porte. 

The principle has been adopted 
that the soldiers employed in the 
other parts of my dominions shall 
serve for five years, at the end of 


which term they shall be exchanged 


for recruits. That being the case, it is 
necessary that in this respect the same 
system should also be followed in Egypt. 
Consequently, it will be necessary to form 
out of the soldiers the most recently in- 
corporated into the LKgyptian troops, 
20,000 men, to whom the principle of 
the period of service, reckoning from the 
day of their first entrance into it, shall 
hereafter be applied. Of this corps, 
18,000 men shall be employed for the 
enternal service of Egypt, and the 2,000 
shall be employed here. And as the fifth 
part of these 20,000 men will have to be 
replaced every year, there shall be taken 
every year from the population of Egypt, 
by legal ballot, having regard to my 
humane feelings, and observing the most 
perfect wmpartiality, 4,000 men.; 3,600 
of whom shall be retained in Egypt, and 
the 400 sent to Constantinople. The 
soldiers who shall have been the first to 


That being the case, it would 
be requisite that the same system 
should also be observed in Egypt in 
that respect. But with regard to 
the duration of the service, the dis- 
positions of the people shall be at- 
tended to, at the same time that 
what is required by equity is ob- 
served with regard to them. 

_ Four hundred men shall be sent 
every year to Constantinople to re- 
place others. 


enter the service, either here or there, 


and who shall have completed their fifth . 


year of service, shall be dismissed to their 
respective countries, and those who shall 
have once completed the term of service, 
shall not be again enlisted. 

There may be a difference, on account 
of the climate, in the stuff of which the 
clothing of the troops of Egypt shall be 
made, but there must be none either in 
the uniform, or in the shape of the clothes, 
or in the distinguishing marks of rank, 
or in the flags, between the aforesmd 
troops and the troops of my Sublime 
Porte. 

The troops to be employed on board 
the Egyptian vessels, officers and soldiers, 
‘Shall have altogether the same clothing 
and the same distinguishing marks of 
their ranks as the troops of this place; the 
vessels shall carry the same flag as those 
of this place. 

The Governor of Egypt shall ap- 
point the officers of the land and sea 
forces up to the rank of Col-Agassi, 
the rank immediately below that of Chef 
de Bataillon. With regard to the 
appointments to ranks higher than 
that of Col-Agassi, it will be abso- 
lutely necessary to apply for permis- 
sion for them, and to take my orders 
thereupon. 

Henceforth the Pashas of Egypt 
shall not be at liberty to build vessels 
of war;withouthaving first applied for 
the permission of my Sublime Porte, 
and having obtained from it a clear 
and positive authority. 

As each of the conditions settled 
as above is annexed to the privilege 
of hereditary succession, if a single 
one of them is not executed, that 
privilege of hereditary succession 
shall forthwith be abolished and 
annulled. 

Such being my supreme pleasure 
on all the points above specified, 
thou, thy children, and thy descend- 
ants, grateful for this exalted sove- 
reign favour, ye shall be diligent in 
scrupulously executing the condi- 
tions laid down, ye shall take heed 
not to infringe them, ye shall be 
careful to ensure the repose and the 
tranquillity of the Egyptians by pro- 
tecting them from all injury and 
from all oppressions, ye shall report 
to this place, and ye shall apply for 
orders on all matters of importance 
which concern those countries, it 
being for these purposes that the 
present Imperial Firman, which is 
decorated with my Imperial Order, 
has been written, and is sent to you. 


There shall be no difference be- 
tween the distinguishing marks and 
the flags of the troops which shall be 
employed there, and the distinguish- 
ing marks and the flags of the other 
troops of my Sublime Porte. The 
officers of the Egyptian navy shall 
have the same distingishing marks 
of ranks, and the Egyptian vessels 
shall have the same flags, as the offi- 
cers and vessels of this place. 
Colonel. 


Colonel, that is to say, of Pashas 
Miri lin (Brigadier-Generals), and of 
Pashas Ferik (Generals of Division). 


3 L2 


No. 279. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Recewved June 12.) 


My Lord, Therapia, May 23, 1841. 

I HAVE the honour to inclose translation I have just received of a 
firman specifying the amount and mode of payment of the tribute imposed 
upon the Pasha of Egypt by the Sublime Porte. 


I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure in No. 279. 
Firman addressed to Mehemet Ali. 
(Traduction.) 


Toi Vizir sus-mentionné! 


COMME tu as été confirmé dans le gouvernement de |’Egypte avec 
hérédité, aux conditions résolutoires qui sont insérées dans un autre 
firman, ma Volonté Souveraine est, que tu ayes a payer annuellement 
pour ma Sublime Porte, sur les droits de douane, sur les dimes et la 
capitation, et sur les autres revenus et produits de cette province, un 
tribut de 80,000 bourses* ; qu’afin que le montant du tribut ne varie pas, 
puisque les prix des monnaies changent, on ait a calculer la somme de 
80,000 bourses sur les prix des Colonnates d’Espagne qui sont en crédit 
en Egypte; et que le montant actuel des Colonnates soit payé chaque 
année en nature, ou bien: que son équivalent soit payé en d’autres bonnes 
monnaies. Tels sont mes ordres, en conséquence desquels le présent 
firman Impérial a été écrit et envoyé. ' 

Ainsi, lorsque tu auras appris de quoi il s’agit, tu agiras de la 
maniére ci-dessus énoncée, et tu auras soin de payer au trésor Impérial, 
dés que le temps du payement sera arrivé, le. tribut ci-dessus énoncé. 


(Translation.) 


Thou Vizir above-mentioned, 


AS thou hast been confirmed in the government of Egypt with here- 
ditary succession, on the absolute conditions inserted in another firman, 
my sovereign will is that thou shouldst pay annually to my Sublime Porte, 
out of the customs-duties, the tenths, and the capitation tax, and out of 
the other revenues and produce of that province, a tribute of 80,000 
purses ; that in order that the amount of tribute may not vary, since the 
value of money changes, the sum of 80,000 purses should be calculated 
according to the value of the Spanish pillared dollars which have currency 
in Kgypt; and that the actual amount of pillared dollars should be paid 
every year in kind, or at all events its equivalent be paid in other good 
coins. Such are my orders, in consequence whereof the present Imperial 
firman has been written and sent. 

Thus, when thou shalt have been apprized hereof, thou wilt act in 
the manner above-mentioned, and thou wilt be careful to pay to the 
Imperial treasury, when the time for payment shall arrive, the tribute 


above stated. 


eee 


* §0,000 purses, or 40,000,000 Turkish piastres, amounting at present to about 363,635/. sterling. 


445 


No. 280. 
Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


My Lord, Foreign Office, June 15, 1841. 


_ _ 1 HAVE received your Excellency’s despatch of the 22nd of May 
inclosing a copy of the answer which you returned to Rifaat Pasha on 
the 18th of May, on the subject of the draft of an amended firman to be 
addressed to the Pasha of Egypt, which Rifaat Pasha communicated to 
yourself and to your Colleagues: and I have to acquaint your Excellency 
that Her Majesty’s Government approve that anwser. 

Iam, & 


, &e., 
(Signed) PALMERSTON. 
re renege 
No. 281. 


Viscount Palmerston to Mr. Bulwer. 


Sir, Foreign Office, June 11, 1841, 
I HAVE been prevented by a variety of circumstances from sooner 
answering your despatch of the 28th ultimo, in which you give me an 
account of the substance of a despatch from the Baron de Bourqueney, 
which was read to you by M. Guizot, and of a conversation which you 
had with M. Guizot upon the subject of that despatch. 
But as it appears by your despatch, that M. Guizot is under a 
mistaken impression as to what passed between me and the Baron de 
Bourqueney in the conversation of which the Baron de Bourqueney 
made a report in the despatch which M. Guizot read to you, it is necessary 
that I should send you a correct statement of what passed between me 
and the Baron de Bourqueney on that occasion. 

The Baron de Bourqueney having called upon me in consequence of a 
note which [ had written to him requesting him to do so, 1 stated that I had 
wished to see him in order to tell him that my Colleagues in the Conference 
began to be impatient for the signature of the Convention between the Five 
Powers about the Dardanelles and Bosphorus, the draft of which we had 
initialed on the 15th of March, and I had been requested by them to ask 
him whether he was then empowered and prepared to sign that Con- 
vention. 

He said, that he was not yet authorized to sign that Convention, but 
would write immediately to Paris for an authority to do so, and had no 
doubt of obtaining that authority, if I would communicate to him, for the 
purpose of its being transmitted to his Government, a copy of the Memo- 
randum from the Turkish Government which Chekib Effendi had then 
recently communicated to me, and in which the Porte announces its 
intention that the Hatti Sheriff which the Sultan sent on the 13th of 
February to Mehemet Ali, specifying the conditions attached to his 
appointment as hereditary Pasha of Egypt, should be modified, in regard 
to the mode of succession, with respect to the manner of fixing the amount 
of tribute, and as to the rule about military promotions. 

I said, that I could not well send him a written copy of that Memo- 
randum, or of the note by which Chekib Effendi had communicated it to 
me, because to do so, would look as if the Four Powers had been required 
by France to compel the Sultan to modify his Hatti Sheriff, and as if, 
having done so, they were rendering to France an account of the manner 
in which they had carried her desires into execution. This, I said, France 
herself had never asked, but, on the contrary, the French Government has 
declared that it would have nothing to do with the execution of the Treaty 


of July. 


446 


Baron de Bourqueney fully concurred in this statement, and said that 
it would be enough if I would declare to him that the Treaty of July has 
been fully executed and worked out, and that nothing can now happen 
that can lead the Four Powers to deliberate upon any matter arising out 
of, or directly connected with, the engagements of that Treaty. He said, 
that although France has certainly declared that she will have nothing to 
do with the execution of the Treaty of July, and is willing to sign the 
initialed Convention about the Straits, yet she cannot well sign that 
Convention until she shall know that the temporary engagements of the 
Treaty of July have been fully executed and worked out. Because it 
would place the French Government in an awkward and embarrassing 
position, if, after France, as one of Five, had signed a Treaty connected 
with the affairs of the Levant, the other Four should have occasion to 
deliberate without France, upon a matter connected with those affairs. 

I said, that undoubtedly this was consistent with what he had said 
to me at the time when the Draft of Convention was agreed to and initialed, 
and that now as well as then, I must admit that there was reason in his 
statement; that, at all events, the French Government is the only judge 
of what suits it in this matter, and that I did not see that the Four Powers 
could justly object to the line which, according to M. de Bourqueney, it 
intended to pursue. But I said, that I regretted that it was not in my 
power to make to him the declaration which he required as a preliminary 
condition for the signature of the Convention by France. 

I said, that by the Treaty of July, 1840, the Four Powers took 
towards the Sultan an engagement ‘to determine Mehemet Ali to conform 
to the arrangement specified in the Separate Act annexed to that Treaty.” 
That this arrangement consisted of two parts, one regarding territory, 
the other regarding the relations of Mehemet Ali, as a subject, towards 
the Sultan, as his Sovereign. 

The first part, I said, has been fully executed by the expulsion of 
Mehemet Ali’s troops and authorities from Syria; the second has been in 
some degree executed by the restitution of the Turkish fleet; but other por- 
tions of this second part have not yet been conformed to by Mehemet Ali; and 
those portions relate to matters which are of fundamental importance, and 
which the Four Powers have, in the Collective Notes addressed by their 
Representatives in London to Chekib Effendi, declared to be absolutely 
indispensable conditions. The points which I particularly alluded to 
were, I said, the stipulations of the Separate Act which declare, that all 
the Laws and all the Treaties of the Ottoman Empire shall apply to Egypt 
as much as to every other province of that empire; and that Mehemet 
Ali should levy only the taxes and imposts established by law. 

I said, that I had indeed received a letter from Commodore Napier, 
which was written from Alexandria on the 22nd of February, two days 
after the arrival of the Turkish Commissioner with the Hatti Sheriffs, and 
which letter Commodore Napier had shown to Mehemet Ali, or Boghos Bey, 
before he sent it off, in order to be sure that he rightly stated Mehemet Ali’s 
intentions; and in that letter Sir Charles Napier said, that Mehemet Ali 
had unconditionally accepted those Articles of the Hatti Sheriff which 
stated that the Laws and Treaties of the empire should be fully applicable 
to Egypt as well as to all the other provinces, and that none but the legal 
taxes should be levied by Mehemet Ali; but I said, that, nevertheless, 
Mehemet Ali at the same time that he was giving these assurances to Sir 
Charles Napier was writing very differently to the Grand Vizier; and in- 
his letter to the Vizier, which is the only communication which he has 
hitherto made to the Porte on these matters, he very civilly indeed, but 
very plainly and positively, declines to apply and execute in Egypt the 
Laws and Treaties of the empire, or to restrict himself to levying none 
but the taxes which are or may be established by law. 

I said, that as this refusal of his had been mixed up with his remon- 
strance against those other parts of the Hatti Sheriff which the Sultan 
had since agreed to modify, it is very probable, that when the modifica- 
tions which have been made by. the Sultan shall become known to 
Mehemet Ali, Mehemet Ali will withdraw his objections to those conditions 
which the Four Powers have, upon full consideration, declared to be 


447 


indispensable; and it is to be hoped that Mehemet Ali will send in his 
complete, unreserved and unconditional acquiescence in the terms of the 
_ Matti Sheriff, as definitively settled by the Porte. ) 

But if, contrary to all just and reasonable expectation, this should 
not happen, and if Mehemet Ali should still be contumacious, the Sultan 
would probably address himself thereupon to his Four Allies; and it is 
impossible that the Four Powers should not have to deliberate together. as 
to what, in such a state of things, the engagements of the Treaty of July, 
1840, would require them to do. 

I said, that of course I could not know beforehand what the result 
of such a deliberation might be; and it was obvious that such result would 
depend upon the circumstances of the case; but to tell him frankly my 
Own opinion, I thought it fair to say, that it seemed to me, that in such a 
case, if the Sultan were to apply to the Four Powers, in virtue of the 
Treaty of July, to assist him in compelling Mehemet Ali to submit to the 
arrangement specified in the Separate Act annexed to that Treaty, the 
Four Powers would be bound in honour to comply with that demand, and 
ae could be no doubt of their being able to carry their engagement into 
ellect. 

I said, that thus he would see, that although it is extremely impro- 
bable that the Four Powers can have occasion again to deliberate with a 
view to any measures in pursuance of the engagements they have con- 
tracted by the Treaty of July, because it is highly unlikely that Mehemet 
Ali can continue contumacious upon the points which I had mentioned, 
yet such a case is not impossible; and therefore I could not make to 
Baron de Bourqueney the declaration which he required. 

He said, that this being so, he did not see how he could write to M. 
Guizot for an authority to sign the initialed Convention, because in 
applying for such authority, he would be obliged to report the explanation 
which J had just given him, and that explanation would render it impos- 
sible for M. Guizot, with reference to parliamentary and other domestic 
considerations, to send him an authority to sign; what then could be done? 
there seemed to him no choice but to wait some time longer, and still to 
postpone the signature of the Convention. 

I said that, according to the view which the French Government 
took of the matter, and which I could not say was an unreasonable one, 
there seemed to be no alternative but to wait; and it appeared to me that we 
must soon hear from Alexandria that everything was satisfactorily adjusted. 
I observed, that the advice which the French Government has been lately 
giving to Mehemet Ali, and its declaration that it would not support him 
in pretensions which it pronounced to be unreasonable, must have a great 
effect upon his determination, and would probably lead him to give way. 

I said, however, that I was ready to sign the proposed Convention 
at once and immediately; that day, the next day, any day. That it 
would be convenient to Her Majesty's Government, with reference to 
domestic considerations, that the Convention should be signed ; and that 
its being signed would be useful for European purposes, because it would 
render Mehemet Ali more disposed to give way upon the points on which 
he still holds out ; for if France had signed the new Convention, he would 
give up all hope of support from her; whereas, while she holds off from 
the other Powers, he will always speculate upon receiving assistance from 
her, whatever her Government and its Agents may tell him to the 
contrary. 

The Baron de Bourqueney assured me that M. de Chabot had been 
instructed to state to Mehemet Ali in the plainest manner, that his 
pretensions upon all points, except the three with regard to which the 
Sultan has agreed to modify his Hatti Sheriff, are untenable and 
groundless ; and to declare to him, that the French Government will give 
him no countenance whatever in maintaining those unreasonable pre- 
tensions. . 

The Baron de Bourqueney concluded by saying that, under all 
circumstances, he saw nothing that the French Government could do but 
to wait; but he said he trusted confidently that this further delay would 
not be charged against France as an indication of any wish on. her part 


ay 


448 


to recede from the initialed Convention; and he hoped that it would not 
be put forward by any of the Four Powers as a ground for a change of 
purpose on their part, and for a refusal on their side to sign when France 
may think herself at liberty to do so. 

I said, that I would undertake to justify to my Colleagues in the 
Conference the further delay asked for by France, and that I was quite 
prepared to say that the grounds alleged by Baron de Bourqueney for 
that delay, appeared to me to be reasonable, although at the same time, 
I thought that the French Government might with perfect consistency 
wave those grounds, if it thought proper to do so. And I also said, that 
I was quite sure that none of the Four Powers would ever think of 
making the present delay of France, a ground for a refusal.on their part 
to sign by and by the initialed Convention. } 

From this statemené I think it will be seen that it cannot justly be 
alleged, as you report M. Guizot to have stated to you, that ‘the objec- 
tion and the delay to sign the initialed Convention proceed from the 
Government of Great Britain.” On the contrary, the Government of 
Great Britain is ready to sign that Convention immediately, and the 
objection and the delay proceed from the Government of France; which 
Government refuses to sign, unless the British Government makes a 
previous declaration, which cannot be made in the present state of things. 
Her Majesty’s Government, however, do not throw any blame upon that 
of France for this delay. The French Government has a full right to 
judge for itself on this matter; and it is due to Baron de Bourqueney 
that I should repeat, that the objection on which he has founded this 
delay, is not a new one put forward for the occasion, but is entirely in 
accordance with the language which he held when the Convention was 
originally discussed. 

You will give a copy of this despatch to M. Guizot. 

Tam, &c 


(Signed) | PALMERSTON. 


No. 282. 
Viscount Palmerston to Mr. Bulwer. 


Sir, Foreign Office, June 11, 1841. 

WITH reference to my preceding despatch, of this day, I have to 
observe, that although the reason alleged by the French Government for 
delaying to sign the initialed Convention is perfectly reasonable in itself, 
and cannot be gainsaid; yet there is no difficulty in seeing what 
the effect. is, of the course which that Government follows in this 
matter. The French Government has said that it does make its sig- 
nature of the proposed Convention depend upon the decision of the 
Sultan, but that it does not make its signature depend on the deci- 
sion of Mehemet Ali; that it will sign the Convention the moment that 
it shall learn officially from the Four Powers, that the Sultan has modi- 
fied the conditions of his first Hatti Sheriff, about the mode in which 
Mehemet Ali’s family shall succeed to the Pashalic of Egypt, about the 
manner in which the amount of the tribute is to be fixed, and about. the 
degree of military rank up to which the Pasha of Egypt is to be allowed 
to select officers for promotion ; and that it will not postpone signing the 
Convention in order to learn what answer Mehemet Ali may give to the 
Sultan’s Hatti Sheriff so modified. 

This proceeding of the French Government, at first sight, seems to 
be very fair, and has the appearance of an intention to withdraw all sup- 
port from Mehemet Ali, and to leave him to his fate as soon as the Sultan 


has complied with the recommendation of the Four Powers. 


But upon a closer examination, it will be seen that the course thus 
pursued by the French Government tends to give support to Mehe- 
met Ali. Because the French Government, though it Says it is 
ready to sign the Convention, now that the Sultan has modified his 


449 


Hatti Sheriff, nevertheless requires the Four Powers to make a preli- 
minary declaration, that the Treaty of July has been fully executed and 
worked out; and that nothing can happen which can Jead the Four 
Powers again to deliberate with a view to take measures in execution of 
the engagements of that Treaty. But if, in the present state of things, 
the Four Powers were to make such a declaration, what would be the 
consequence thereof? Why, that Mehemet Ali would have the benefit of 
the Sultan’s modification of those Articles which the Four Powers advised 
him to modify; and that Mehemet Ali would also have the benefit of his 
own refusal to accede to those other conditions of the Hatti Sheriff, which 
the Four Powers have declared to be indispensable. For, on the one 
hand, the Sultan could not retract the concessions which he has made; 
and, on the other hand, the Four Powers would have declared that they 
considered the Treaty of July fully accomplished and executed, although 
they knew at the time when they made that declaration, that Mehemet 
Ali was refusing compliance with some of the conditions of the Separate 
Act; and therefore both Mehemet Ali and the French Government would 
assert, with some show of reason, that the Four Powers intended by 
their declaration to give up the unexecuted conditions of the Separate 
Act, and no longer to insist upon the acceptance of those conditions by 
Mehemet Ali. 

Mehemet Ali would, consequently, persist in his refusal to admit that 
the Laws and Treaties of the Ottoman Empire should be carried into 
execution in Egypt; and he would continue to maintain that he must be 
at liberty to levy what taxes and imposts he pleases in Egypt, without 
confining himself to the taxes established by law. 

Mehemet Ali would thus have carried all his points; and if at some 
future time the Sultan were to prepare to employ force, in order to compel 
him to conform to the Laws and Treaties of the Ottoman Empire, France 
would step in, and remonstrate in behalf of Mehemet Ali, saying to the 
Sultan, that the Four Powers had, in 1841, deliberately and purposely 
absolved Mehemet Ali from those conditions of the Treaty of July, 1840, 
because they had declared that Treaty to be fulfilled and worked out, 
although at the time when they made that declaration, they knew that 
Mehemet Ali was still refusing to comply with those conditions; and 
France would say, moreover, that the declaration so made by the Four 
Powers had been exacted from them by her, as the price of her signature 
to the Convention about the Straits; and that, consequently, she was 
fully entitled, and even in honour bound, to prevent the Sultan from 
depriving Mehemet Ali of privileges and immunities which had been 
granted to him in 1841, at her especial intercession. 

It is obvious that, by such a course of things, France would be able 
to assert that, at her bidding, the Four Powers had released Mehemet 
Ali from conditions distinctly specified in the Treaty of July, and sub- 
sequently declared by the Four Powers in the Collective Notes of their 
Representives at London, to be indispensably necessary. 

~~ This would be an humiliation for the Four Powers; and ought to be 
resisted. j ‘ 
: As France wishes to sign the Convention, and as she cannot sign as 

one of Five, till she is sure that the other Four will not have to deliberate 
without her, she has only to exert that influence at Alexandria, which, 
notwithstanding all that is said to the contrary, is well-known to be 
still paramount, and thus to compel Mehemet Ah to signify to the 
Sultan his full and formal acquiescence in all the provisions of the 


ydified Hatti Sheriff. | 
on T ayer stated all this more than once to Prince Esterhazy, to Baron 


nann, and to Baron Bilow. 
ear: Iam, &c. 


(Signed) PALMERSTON! 
3M 


450 
No. 283. 


Viscount Palmerston to Mr. Bulwer. 


Sir, Foreign Office, June 12, 1841. 


I HAVE this morning received a despatch from Her Majesty’s 
Ambassador at Constantinople, reporting that Mehemet Ali has given 
orders for building two new ships of the line. 

You will communicate this fact to the French Government ; and you 
will observe to them that one of the few conditions of the Hatti Sheriff of 
the 13th of February last, which Mehemet Ali accepted without reserve, 
was, that he should build no more ships of the line, without the previous 
sanction of the Sultan. 

lam, & 


Cay 
(Signed) PALMERSTON 


No. 284. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received June 18.) 


My Lord, Therapta, May 26, 1841. 


I HAVE again urged Rifaat Pasha to expedite the despatch of the 
firman to Alexandria. I hope it will be done directly. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No. 285. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received June 18.) 


My Lord, Therapia, May 26, 1841. 


I have received an answer from his Excellency Rifaat Pasha to my 
letter urging the Porte to send the firman to Alexandria. His Excellency 
says, that he concurs with me in all I said on the subject, and will urge 
the council to complete the vizirial letter, and that I may be certain the 
firman will be sent from hence in three or four days. It appears that 
the vizirial letter has been found difficult to draw up; and it also appears 
that the ministers had no steamer to carry the firman, and have been 
obliged to wait for the return of one sent to Candia, and which is expected 
to arrive here to-morrow or the next day at the latest. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No. 286. 
Mr. Bulwer to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received June 21.) 


My Lord, Paris, June 18, 1841. 


YOUR Lordship’s messenger arrived at Paris on Monday, and 
having had your Lordship’s despatch of June 11 copied, I called on M. 
Guizot with it on the following morning. 

I thought it best, however, in the first instance, to read to M. Guizot 
that portion of my own despatch of the 28th of May, to which your Lord- 
ship replied, in order that | might be sure that I had faithfully given to 
your Lordship, the spirit and the~substance of the conversation which 
I had had the honour of reporting. 


491 


_ OnM. Guizot observing that the report in question had accurately 
given the sense (I could not pretend in every instance to give the precise 
terms) of his observations, and of that despatch of M. de Bourqueney 
-which he had read to me, I read to his Excellency thé account which 
your Lordship gives me of the interview between your Lordship and the 
French Chargé d’ Affaires. 

To this M. Guizot listened with silent attention until he came 
to the phrase “the further delay asked for by France,” when he 
declared that he had never asked, nor had M. de Bourqueney 
asked in his name for any delay; that he had always held the same 
language, namely, that he would sign the Convention of March when 
the Treaty of July was declared to be at an end, and not before; that he 
had never yet asked for any delay, and did not now do so. 

I begged him to allow me to proceed with the despatch since I had 
begun to read it, and that he would then better see and seize its whole 
meaning, and that, moreover, it was my intention and in conformity with 
my instructions, to leave the copy I had in my hand with him. Subse- 
quently, when I had concluded the despatch, M. Guizot again recur- 
red to the above-mentioned passage; I observed that I thought, 
‘considering the structure of the phrase in question, and of the 
despatch in general, that he attached too much importance to the 
word “asked,” and that the whole pith of the matter lay in this simple 
exposition of facts, viz., That the Government of Her Majesty were 
willing now, and had always been willing to sign the initialed Convention, 
and that the Government of France was now willing to sign it, after a 
certain declaration on the part of Her Majesty’s Government, which your 
Lordship did not think it consistent with the circumstances of the 
moment to make; that such being the case, the British Government could 
not be accused of delaying an affair it was willing to conclude, and that 
your Lordship on the other hand did not blame the French Government, 
(though you might differ from it in opinion,) for thinking that the 
declaration which at the moment could not be given, should be a pre- 
liminary to the signature desired. 

M. Guizot then said, that neither did he for his part blame the British 
Government for the line it adopted, but that he could not but observe 
that the language held to M. de Bourqueney on the 10th of March, (I 
think that was the date,) was different from that since employed; and he 
turned to a despatch of M. de Bourqueney, of, I believe, March the 11th, 
and read me a passage of which I can only give the meaning, which 
was, that he (M. de Bourqueney) had asked on that occasion the 
different members of the Conference whether they considered that there 
was any chance of either a moral or material force (such I think were 
the words) being used to compel Mehemet Ali to subscribe to the con- 
ditions which the Sultan imposed; that the Representatives of Prussia 
and Austria answered, “non, mille fois non,” and that your Lordship 
taking more time to consider, answered in effect (1 cannot recollect the 
exact passage, which is long, in M. de Bourqueney’s despatch), though less 
warmly, in the same manner. 

«Thus,” said M. Guizot, “I was assured on the 10th of March that 
no force of any kind could be employed against Mehemet Ali, and now 
I am told that it may; I do’nt find fault with this difference, but I point 
it out.” 

I said, that I was not in possession from my Government of what 

assed on the occasion he alluded to, and therefore I could not speak of 
it; but that if a different language was held now, as to the chances of 
having to compel Mehemet Ali to assume his situation as a vassal of the 
Porte, the conduct of Mehemet Ali himself on whom those chances 
depended might be different; and I then informed M. Guizot of the 
intelligence your Lordship had just received from Constantinople as to 
the two new vessels which he (the Pasha) was now building. Finally, 
our conversation concluded by my leaving the despatch of J une 11, with 
M. Guizot, and agreeing to call again on Thursday morning, when he 
would speak to me further on the Ey and when [ also expected that 

2 


452 


he would have received some intelligence from Alexandria which might 
bring the whole of this question to a termination. 
I have &c., 
(Signed) HENRY LYTTON BULWER. 


oP eOBE AY ee ge ae eee oe 
No. 287. | 


Mr. Bulwer to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received June 21.) 


My Lord, Paris, June 18, 1841. 


I RECEIVED a note from M. Guizot yesterday, begging me to defer 
my visit to him till to-day. I consequently called upon his Excellency 
this morning, and then asked him whether he had again read through the 
despatch of June 11, which I had the honour to communicate to him on 
Tuesday. M. Guizot said that he was going to a council at eleven, that 
he could not speak on that matter till after the council, and again alluded 
to the expression, “ the further delay asked for by France,” which he said 
he must reply to. 

I then begged to know what intelligence had arrived from Constan- 
tinople and Alexandria ? 

From Constantinople the French Government has received the infor- 
mation, that the firman was sent off on the 3lst of May, and that it spe- 
cifies the tribute at 80,000 purses. (I may as well mention, since I have 
seen various values given to this Turkish mode of estimation, that a purse 
is about 125 francs; and that consequently 80,000 purses is 10,000,000 
francs, or about 400,000/.) 

The news from Alexandria is not yet arrived, but we calculated that 
it might be received to-morrow or next day, and contain the definitive 
answer of the Pasha. 

I have, &c., 


(Signed) HENRY LYTTON BULWER. 


No. 288. 
Mr. Bulwer to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received June 23.) 


My Lord, Paris, June 20, 1841. 


THE despatches arrived this morning from Alexandria are not of a 
later date than the 26th, consequently they contain no intelligence of 
importance. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) HENRY LYTTON BULWER. 


No. 289. 
Mr. Bulwer to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received June 23.) 


My Lord, Paris, June 21, 1841. 


ALTHOUGH you have probably received the same information from 
other quarters, I take the liberty of observing, since the amount of tribute 
demanded from Mehemet Ali may be a subject of controversy, that 12,000 
purses formed, as I understand, the original tribute which the Pasha paid 
when the piastre was worth four times its present amount, and when, con- 
sequently, 12,000 purses might be considered as 48,000 purses at this time. 

The difference, therefore, between the sum now demanded and that 
formerly paid is not as may be contended 68,000, but 32,000 purses. 

All persons conversant with the changes which Turkish coin has 
undergone of late years, will admit this explanation. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) HENRY LYTTON BULWER. 


453 ’ 


No. 290. 


M. Guiszot to the Baron de Bourqueney.—(Communicated to Lord 
Palmerston by the Baron de Bourquency, June 24, 1841.) 


Monsieur le Baron, Paris, le 18 Juin, 1841. 


_JE vous envoie ci-joint, copie d’une dépéche, en date du 11 de ce 
mois, que Lord Palmerston a écrite 4 M. Bulwer, en le chargeant de m’en 
donner communication. Comme vous le verrez, elle a pour objet de 
rectifier les impressions inexactes que le Gouvernement du Roi aurait 
recues sur le sens des explications qui ont eu lieu, le 24 Mai dernier, 
entre Lord Palmerston et vous, lorsqu’il vous a exprimé, au nom de la 
Conférence, le veeu que le paraphe apposé a la'Convention du 15 Mars fut 
transformé en signature définitive. Je ne m’attacherai pas a relever les 
différences que je remarque entre le récit que fait Lord Palmerston, de 
ces explications, et celui que vous m’en avez adressé vous-méme le 25 Mai 
dernier. La dépéche que vient de me communiquer M. Bulwer, a été 
rédigée prés de trois semaines aprés l’entretien auquel elle se rapporte, et 
lorsque cet entretien était déjad devenu l’objet de discussions qui ont pu, 
méme a Vinsgu de Lord Palmerston, influer sur ses souvenirs. Mon 
intention est d’éviter toute controverse qui ne serait pas absolument indis- 
pensable, et n’aurait d’autre effet que d’introduire dans la grande question 

_qui nous occupe, de nouvelles et inutiles difficultés. Mais j’ai besoin, et 

c’est mon devoir, de bien établir, en rappelant simplement les faits, la 
scrupuleuse conséquence de notre conduite depuis l’ouverture de cette 
négociation, et notre loyale disposition 4 transformer maintenant notre 
paraphe en signature définitive, sans rien changer aux termes auxquels 
nous avons, dés le premier jour, attaché cette transformation. 

Quand la Conférence de Londres nous a invités, le 5 Mars dernier, a 
consacrer, en commun avec les Puissances signataires du Traité du 15 
Juillet, le principe de la cléture des détroits, elle nous a adressé cette 
invitation parcequ’elle considérait la Question Turco-Egyptienne comme 
terminée, et en nous déclarant que telle était sa ferme conviction. 

Les Actes mémes qu’on avait préparés, et qui nous ont été communi- 
qués 4 cette époque, ne laissaient a cet égard aucun doute. Le Protocole 
signé le 5 Mars entre les Plénipotentiaires des Quatre Puissances, affirme 
que les circonstances qui ont motivé le départ de leurs Consuls d Alexandrie, 
ont cessé d’exister. Le projet de Protocole qui invite la France 4 con- 
sacrer le principe de la cléture des détroits, déclare que les difficuliés qui 
ont déterminé le Sultan a réclamer Vappui des Cours @ Autriche, de la 
Grande Bretagne, de Prusse, et de Russie, viennent détre applanies. 
Tous ces documens ont précisément pour objet d’établir que la Question 
Turco-Egyptienne est close en principe, que l'invitation adressée ala 
France est la conséquence de cette cléture, et que notre signature de la 
Convention projetée aura pour effet de la constater définitivement. _ 

En méme tems qu’elles exprimaient 4 la France cette conviction, les 
Puissances tenaient, a la Porte elle-méme, un langage encore plus positif, 
s’il est possible. Dans la note adressée le 13 Mars 4 Chékib Effendi, 
elles prennent acte de la communication par laquelle la Porte leur 
annonce que la question @ Egypte se trowve terminee ; elles expriment leur 
vive satisfaction de voir ainsi pleinement réalisées les intentions bien- 
veillantes de la Convention du 15 Juillet ; et en parlant des discussions 
auxquelles pourrait donner lieu, entre le Sultan et le Pacha, le Hatti 
Shériff du 13 Février, elles déclarent formellement que cest & Vautorité 
seule du Sultan qwil appartient aujour@hui de résoudre les questions 
W@administration intérieure qui restent encore a régler, et qu’elles 
n’entreront point, 4 cet égard, dans un examen quit ne seratt point de 

ressort. : haf oie = 
ue Enfin je lis dans votre dépéche du 11 Mars, comme je vous Vai déja 
rappelé le 31 Mai dernier, ce résumé de vos conversations, a cette époque, 
avec les Plénipotentiaires d’ Angleterre, d’Autriche et de Prusse : 

“Ya-t-il possibilité d’appui prété par les Puissances au Sultan, en 


454 


vertu du Traité du 15 Juillet, pour forcer Méhémet Ali 4 accepter les 
conditions du Hatti Shériff ?” 

«A Punanimité.—® Non.’ ” 

“ Ya-t-il possibilité d’intervention diplomatique, sous forme d’Acte 
émané du centre de Londres, pour le réglement de cette question 
intérieure ?” . 

“La Prusse et lAutriche: ‘Non, décidément.’ Lord Palmerston, 
aprés avoir cherché dans son imagination comme pour ne pas encourir 
la responsabilité d’une assertion légérement avancée :—‘ I] serait possible, 
quoique invraisemblable, que la Porte nous demandat des explications 
sur quelques parties de la Note responsive du 30 Janvier, auquel cas, 
chacun de nous lui répondrait pour les confirmer dans le sens que nous 
avons compris nous-mémes et que vous avez approuvé.’” 

En présence de faits si positifs, de déclarations si claires et si una- 
nimes, le Gouvernement du Roi ne pouvait conserver, quant a la cléture 
en principe de la Question Turco-Egyptienne, aucune Incertitude, aucun 
doute. Ce fut dans cette confiance que, d’aprés les ordres du Roi, je vous 
autorisai, le 13 Mars, a parapher le projet de Convention relatif aux 
détroits, lorsque le Projet de Protocole éventuel qui nous invitait a signer 
cette Convention, aurait été également paraphé par les Plénipotentiaires 
des Quatre Cours; et la signature définitive fut ajournée, d’un commun 
accord, au moment ot la Porte, en modifiant, d’aprés les conseils de ses 
Alliés, quelques dispositions du Hatti Shériff du 13 Février contre 
lesquelles Méhémet Ali avait élevé des réclamations que les Puissances 
elles-mémes jugeaient. fondées, aurait donné 4 Europe la certitude que la 
Question Turco-Egyptienne, déja close en principe, était également 
terminée en fait, et n’offrait plus aucun intérét Kuropéen. 

Ce qu’on attendait est maintenant accompli. La Porte a suivi les 
sages conseils qui lui ont été donnés; le Hatti Shériff du 13 Février a été 
modifié dans celles de ses dispositions qui pouvaient amener des complica- 
tions nouvelles et graves. Le Gouvernement du Roi n’a rien a ajouter, 
rien 4 changer aux intentions qu’il a manifestées, aux engagemens qu'il a 
contractés le 15 Mars dernier, en paraphant le Projet de Convention relatif 
aux détroits. Il n’a demandé et ne demande aucune déclaration nouvelle, 
aucun délai nouveau. [1 lui suffit de rappeler et de maintenir ce qu'il a 
dit, et ce qu’on lui a dit, au début de cette négociation. Il reconnait que 
la circonstance a laquelle il avait attaché le transformation du paraphe en 
signature définitive se trouve réalisée, et il est prét 4 donner cette signa- 
ture, pourvu que les Puissances, qui au mois de Mars dernier regardaient 
déja la Question Turco-Egyptienne comme close, et ont. paraphé alors le 
Protocole éventuel qui le déclare, persistent aujourd’hui dans leur convic- 
tion, transforment, selon leur promesse, le paraphe de ce Protocole en 
signature définitive, et témoignent ainsi d'un commun accord que le terme 
de cette affaire est enfin arrivé, et qu’il ne saurait plus y avoir lieu de leur 
part, en vertu du Traité du 15 Juillet, 4 aucune intervention prolongée ou 
renouvelée. 

Vous voudrez bien, Monsieur, donner 4 Lord Palmerston communieca- 
tion de cette dépéche, et lui en laisser copie. 
. Recevez, &c., 


(Signé) GUIZOT. 


(Translation.) 


M. le Baron, Paris, June 18, 1841. 

I SEND you herewith a copy of a despatch dated the 11th instant, 
which Lord Palmerston has written to Mr. mala. directing him to com- 
municate it tome. Its object, as you will see, is to rectify the erroneous 
impressions which the Government of the King may have received with 
regard to the meaning of the explanations which took place on the 24th of 
May last, between Lord Palmerston and yourself, when he expressed to 
you, in the name of the Conference, the wish that the initial affixed to the 
Convention of the 15th of March, should be converted into a definitive 
signature. 1 will not occupy myself in pointing out the differences which 


455 


T observe between the account given by Lord’Palmerston of those expla- 
nations, and that which you yourself sent to me of them on the 25th of 
May last. The despatch which Mr. Bulwer has just communicated to me, 
was written nearly three weeks after the conversation to which it relates ; 
and when that conversation had already been the subject of discussions 
which have, possibly, even without Lord Palmerston’s knowledge, had an 
fluence on his recollections. It is my intention to avoid all controversy 
which should not be absolutely indispensable, and which would have no 
other effect than that of introducing into the great question which occu- 
pies us fresh and useless difficulties. But it is necessary for me, and it is 
my duty clearly to make out, by a simple recapitulation of facts, the 
scrupulous consistency of our conduct since the commencement of this: 
negotiation, and our sincere disposition to convert at the present time 
our initial into a definitive signature, without making any change in the 
terms to which we have, from the very first day, subjected that conversion. 

When the Conference of London invited us on the 5th of March last, 
to record, in common with the Powers, Parties to the Treaty of the 15th 
of July, the principle of the closing of the Straits, it addressed that invi- 
tation to us, because it considered the Turco-Egyptian Question as 
concluded, and declaring to us that such was its firm conviction. 

The very Acts which had been prepared, and which were communi- 
cated to us at that time left no doubt in that respect. The Protocol 
signed on the 5th of March by the Plenipotentiaries of the Four Powers 
asserts, that the circumstances which occasioned the departure of their 
Consuls from Alexandria have ceased to exist. The draft of Protocol 
which invites France to record the principle of the closing of the Straits, 
declares, that the difficulties which determined the Sultan to apply for the 
support of the Courts of Austria, Great Britain, Prussia, and Russia, are 
now removed. 'The precise object of all these documents is to establish 
that the Turco-Egyptian Question is in principle closed ; that the invita- 
tion addressed to France is the consequence of its being so closed; and 
that our signature of the contemplated Convention will have the effect of 
definitively recording that fact. 

At the same time that they expressed this conviction to France, the 
Powers held to the Porte itself a language, if possible, still more positive. 
In the Note addressed to Chekib Effendi on the 13th of March, they 
record the communication by which the Porte announces to them that the 
Question of Egypt is at an end; they express their lively satisfaction at 
thus seeing the benevolent intentions of the Convention of the 15th of July 
fully realized; and in speaking of the discussions which the Hatti Sheriff 
of the 13th of February might give rise to between the Sultan and the 
Pasha, they formally declare, that a is the authority of the Sultan alone to 
which it appertains, at the present time, to solve the questions of internal 
administration which still remain to be settled; and that they will not 
enter, in this respect, into an examination which would not be within their 
province. 

Lastly, I read in your despatch of the 11th of March, as I have 
already reminded you on the 31st of May last, this summary of your con- 
versations at that time with the Plenipotentiaries of England, Austria, 
and Prussia. é 

‘Ts there any possibility of support being afforded by the Powers to 
the Sultan, in virtue of the Treaty of the 15th of July, in order to compel 
Mehemet Ali to accept the conditions of the Hatti Sheriff?” 

«“ Unanimously ; ‘No.’ ” i 

“Is there any possibility of diplomatic intervention under the form of 
an Act issued from the centre of London, for the settlement of this internal 

ion ?” 
rer Prussia and Austria; ‘No, decidedly,’ Lord Palmerston, after 
having considered, as if to avoid incurring the responsibility of an asser- 
tion lightly advanced: ‘It. might be possible, although improbable, that 
the Porte should demand explanations on some parts of the answer of the 
30th of January, in which case each of us would reply, in order to confirm 
them in the sense which we have ourselves understood, and which you 


have approved.’ ” 


456 


In the face of such positive facts, of declarations so clear and so una- 
nimous, the Government of the King could not entertain, as regards the 
closing in principle of the Turco-Egyptian Question, any uncertainty, 
any doubt. It was under this persuasion that, by order of the King, I 
authorized you, on the 13th of March, to initial the Draft of Convention 
relative to the Straits, when the Draft of eventual Protocol, which invited 
us to sign that Convention, should in like manner have been initialed by 
the Plenipotentiaries of the Four Courts; and the definitive signature was 
adjourned, by common consent, to the moment at which the Porte, by 
modifying, according to the advice of its Allies, some provisions of the 
Hatti Sheriff of February 13, against which Mehemet Ali had raised 
‘objections which the Powers themselves considered reasonable, should have 
afforded to Europe the certainty that the Turco-Egyptian Question, 
already closed, in principle, was equally concluded in fact, and no longer 
afforded any European interest. 

What was looked for is now accomplished. The Porte has followed 
the prudent advice which was given to it; the Hatti Sheriff of the 13th of 
February has been modified in those of its provisions which might occa- 
‘sion new and serious inconvenience. The Government of the King has 
nothing to add, nothing to alter in the intentions which it manifested in 
the engagements which it contracted on the 15th of March last, on 
initialing the Draft of Convention relative to the Straits. It has not 
demanded, and it does not demand, any new declaration, any fresh delay. 
Ttis sufficient for it to recall and to abide by what it said, and what was 
said to it, at the commencement of this negotiation. It admits that the 
‘circumstance to which it had attached the conversion of the initial into a 
definitive signature is realized, and it is ready to give that signature, pro- 
vided that the Powers who in the month of March last already looked upon 
the Turco-Egyptian Question as closed, and initialed at that time the 
eventual Protocol which declares it to be so, persist at the present time 
in their conviction, convert, according to their promise, the initial of that 
Protocol into a definitive signature, and manifest thus, by common: con- 
sent, that the conclusion of this affair is at length arrived, and that there 
can no longer be occasion on their part, in virtue of the Treaty of July 15, 
for any prolonged or renewed intervention. 

You will have the goodness, Sir, to communicate this despatch to 
Lord Palmerston, and to leave a copy of it with him. 

Receive, &c., 
(Signed) GUIZOT. 


No. 291. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received June 24.) 


My Lord, | Therapia, June 2, 1841. 


HIS Excellency the Internuncio had the goodness to communicate to 
me the inclosed papers from Alexandria. 
I have, &c., 


(Signed) PONSONBY. 


457 
Inclosure in No. 29]. 


Extract of a Letter from Alexandria, dated May 16, 1841. 


_ LA popolazione Franca di Alessandria, la quale teneva per definiti 
gli affari concernenti la vertenza Turco-EKgiziana, rimase per cosi dire 
stordita sentendo che i Signori Consoli Generali avevano ricevuto l’ordine 
di ritardare la loro partenza per qui. 

Tutti i timori gid da qualche tempo assopiti, si risvegliarono. Og- 
nuno teme nuove complicazioni, e gid pare a molti di rivedere sull’orizonte i 
vascelli Inglesi che minacciano di bombardare Alessandria. Quelli stessi 
che poc ’anzi baldanzosi tenevano le cose per definitivamente conchiuse, e 
Speravano in un felice avvenire, sono ora perplessi e prevedono male, se 
una pronta soluzione delle complicazioni sopragiunte non viene a porre 
un termine a questo stato d’incertezza. 

I partigiani poi del Governo Egiziano cantano vittoria. Assicurano 
che il Pascia ha ottenuto tutte le modificazioni che avea chieste, e vanno 
perfino aridersi delle Quattro Potenze Alleate, che dopo d’avere come essi 
dicono, fatto tanti sforzi per annichilire Mehemet Ali, sono ora costrette a 
consigliare il Sultano di accordare al suo potente vassallo tutte quelle 
condizioni che piacquegli di imporre a se stesso, e da mezzo delle quali 
arrivera egli tosto o tardi alla tanto bramata independenza. Difatti, 
aggiungono essi, ha egli 80,000 uomini scelti a sua disposizione, dei buoni 
generali, ne gli viene rotta l’influenza morale che esercita sulla massa, 
perché gli si accorda la facolta di creare gli offiziali. Con cid e questi, 
ed i soldati ed il popolo restano nella persuasione che il suo potere non é 
minimamente scemato, e quindi dominando egli sul loro spirito li sapra 
esaltare a suo piacere, e qualora si presentera un occasione favorevole, che 
non puo tardare, invadera nuovamente il vacillante Impero Ottomano, ed 
il Sultano impotente sara costrette di accordarglila bramata independenza, 
o verra precipitato del mal fermo suo trono. 

Eccole in complesso le dicerie di molti e molti partigiani, che perd 
non riescono a tranquillizare colle loro ciarle la maggiorita del pubblico, la 
quale, come gia ebbi l’onore di dirli, teme di una non lontana nuova 
collisione. 

Frattanto i lavori alle fortificazioni vengono continuati senza inter- 
ruzione, e la guardia nazionale esercitata frequentamente nelle manovre. 

L’armata dicesi essere stata portata al suo completo, per le assidue 
cure di Ibrahim Pascia. 

Gli equipaggi della flotta saranno soldati fra pochi giorni di tutti i 
loro avvanzi, ed é stato deciso che d’ora in poi saranno pagati puntualmente 
ogni mese. Chi conosce quanto si possa contare sulle belle promesse di 
Boghos Bey, mette in dubbio l’esecuzione di tale decisione. 

E stato pure decisa nel Divano la costruzione d’un vascello a tre 
ponti, due a due ponti, e cinque fregati da 64. Prima pero che cid sia 
eseguito, bisognera che il Governo si procurii legnami da costruzione, 
poiché per ora non ne ha, tanti da costruire otto barche canoniére. 

Un bastimento Maltese, giunto recentemente dall’Inghilterra, ports 
al governo oltre a molti oggetti di guerra, dei mortai e delle bombe, 
ciocché, unitamente alle circostanze precedentemente descritte, non é certa- 
mente una pruova di obbedienza e di sommissione di Mehemet Ali verso il 


suo Sovrano. 


(Translation.) 


THE Frank population of Alexandria, who looked upon the affairs 
relating to the Turco-Egyptian Question as definitively settled, became, 
as it were, astounded upon hearing that the Consuls-General had been 
ordered to retard their departure for this place. 

The apprehensions which had been already allayed for some time, 
were again awakened. very one fears new complications, and many 


458 


fancy that they already behold the British ships on the horizon threaten- 
ing to bombard Alexandria. Those who a short time before were exulting 
in the thoughts of a definitive settlement of affairs, and who looked 
forward to a happy state of things, are now perplexed, and apprehend 
evil, unless a prompt solution of these new complications should terminate 
the actual state of uncertainty. 

On the other hand, the partizans of the Egyptian Government shout 
victory. "They assert that the Pasha has obtained all the modifications 
which he demanded, and they even go so far as to laugh at the Four 
Allied Powers, who, they say, after making so-many exertions to annihi- 
late Mehemet Ali, are now obliged to advise the Sultan to grant to his 
powerful vassal all the conditions which he pleased to make for himself, 
and by means of which he will, sooner or later, attain the independence he 
so much covets. They add, in fact, that he has at his disposal 80,000 
chosen men, and good generals, and that he still maintains his moral 
influence over the mass of the people, imasmuch as he has been granted 
the power to appoint his own officers. Thus both they, the soldiers and 
the people, continue in the belief that his power is by no means weakened, 
and with this hold over their minds he will be enabled to inflame them 
as he pleases; and whenever a favorable opportunity arrives, which 
cannot be long, he will again invade the tottering Ottoman Empire, and 
the feeble Sultan will be obliged to grant him the independence he 
desires, or he will be hurled from his weak throne. I give you here 
the substance of the reports of many of these partizans, who, how- 
ever, do not succeed by their idle talk in tranquillizing the majority of the 
people, who, as I before stated, apprehend a not distant collision. 

The works at the fortifications are in the mean time carried on 
without interruption, and the National Guard is frequently exercised in 
manceuvring. 

The army is said to be now complete, owing to the unceasing exer 
tions of Ibrahim Pasha. , 

The crews of the fleet will be paid all their arrears in a few days, 
and it has been decided that they shall be henceforward regularly paid 
every month. The performance of this is, however, doubted by those who 
know the degree of reliance which can be put in the fine promises of 
Boghos Bey. , 

It has been also decided by the Council to construct a three decker, 
two two deckers, and five 64-gun frigates. The Government, however, 
will be obliged first to provide timber for this purpose, for it has not 
sufficient, at this time, to build eight gun-boats. 

A Maltese ship, lately arrived from England, brought some mortars 
and shells for the Government, besides a quantity of other warlike stores. 
This, combined with the before related facts, affords anything but a proof 
of Mehemet Ali’s obedience and submission to his Sovereign. 


<A er er 2 See ee ee eee ee et ITS 
No. 292. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received June 24.) 


My Lord, Therapia, June 2, 1841. 

I HAVE the honour to acquaint you that the firman and vizirial 
letter, and instructions to Muhib Effendi, were sent off yesterday in a 
steamer to Alexandria. 

I inclose copies of the letter and of the instructions. 

I have received. your Lordship’s instructions to the 11th of May, 
by the messenger Townley, whom I propose to despatch on the 5th or 6th 
imstant. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY 


459 


Inclosure I in No. 292. 


Letter from the Grand Vizier to Mehemet ‘Ali; communicated by the Porte 
to the Representatives of the Allied Courts, May 28, 1841. 


(Traduction.) 


_ J’AT pris connaissance de la lettre responsive que votre Altesse m’a 
envoyée en date du 6 Muharem, 1257 (28 Février, 1841), renfermant quel- 
ques représentations et quelques demandes, et je ai mise sous les yeux 
de Sa. Majesté Impériale. 

Sa Hautesse agissant d’aprés les impulsions de son naturel magna- 
nime et les besoins de son cceur plein de bonté pour ses serviteurs, étant 
animée de nouveaux sentimens favorables pour votre Altesse, et ayant eu 
égard aux représentations bienveillantes et aux demandes loyales des 
Hautes Cours amies et alliées, a gracieusement daigné accorder, parmi 
les demandes qui vous avez faites, ce qui suit: 

Pour ce qui regarde la succession, on renonce a I’élection, et la 
succession sera dévolue, dans la ligne masculine, 4 l’ainé de vos fils et de 
vos petits-fils. é 

Il n’est plus question du quart des revenus, et le tribut 4 payer 
annuellement pour la province d’Egypte est fixé a un tant. 

Par rapport aux grades militaires, on aura 4 demander ici l’autorisa- 
tion de nommer des Généraux de Division et des Généraux de Brigade ; 
mais votre Altesse pourra conférer jusqu’au grade de Colonel. 

Quant aux lois de |’Empire, les. principes fondamentaux de ces lois 
consistent. dans la sdreté de la propriété et de la vie, et dans la conserva- 
tion de ’honneur: principes légitimes et naturels qui sont posés dans le 
Hatti Shériff de Gulhané, qui, comme votre Altesse sait, sont des lois 
générales, c’est-a-dire les élémens constitutifs de tout gouvernement, de 
tout pouvoir, dont ils sont, pour ainsi dire, l’4me; et qui ne sont susceptibles 
dans aucun pays, ni de distinction dans leur application, ni de la moindre 
modification. Enfin ces principes ne sauraient varier ni a cause de la 
différence du climat, ni 4 cause de la diversité des caractéres des hommes ; 
et. l’on ne peut pasdire, par exemple,qu’ils sont nécessaires dans un pays, 
et qu’il ne semble pas qu’ils le soient dans un autre. Mais l’esprit de la 
législation et la raison veulent que ces principes soient appliqués dans 
tous les pays en général et sans distinction, a tous les rangs de la société, 
a toutes les classes des sujets, et 4 toutes les nations. Aussi un firman 
Impérial a-t-il été formellement lu et publié 4 ce sujet, il y a quelque 
temps, en Egypte. La volonté divine et les ordres souverains s’opposent a 
ce que ]’on agisse d’une maniére qui soit en la moindre chose en contraven- 
tion aux principes fondamentaux dont il s’agit, et 4 ce qu’on les change. 

Il y a seulement des: lois particuliéres qui doivent en effet, et la 
simple raison nous le fait voir journellement, étre adaptées aux exigences 
locales de chaque pays, et méme au caractére de ses habitans. C’est 
pourquoi Sa Hautesse a bien voulu faire des concessions 4 leur égard, et a 
ordonné ce qui suit: 

A condition que dans aucun temps il ne soit apporté la moindre 
atteinte aux bases du Hatti Shériff de Gulhané, que tous les traités conclus 
et & conclure avec les Puissances amies soient mis entiérement a exécution, 
et que conformément aux traités de commerce, l’ancien systéme des mono- 
poles soit tout-d-fait aboli, les autres réglemens seront mis a exécution en 
Egypte, en les conciliant le mieux que lon pourra avec les exigences 
locales. ; 

Bien que la perception des taxes se fasse dans ces pays-ci par l’entre- 
mise de Defterdars et de Muhassils, pourtant si ce mode de perception 
semblait difficile 4 appliquer a la perception des taxes a prendre en 
Egypte au nom du Sultan, dans ce cas, et attendu que le principal but de 
Sa Hautesse est de mettre partout, et 4 tout égard, tous les sujets de 
VEmpire 4 Vabri des injustices et des vexations, on adoptera dans la 
perception des taxes une bonne méthode qui ne doit pas passer les bornes 
de la justice et de la discrétion. 

[aN 2 


460, 


Comme on ne peut pas dire convenablement, par rapport aux autres 
lois et au temps du service militaire, que les régles établies dans un pays 
ne sauraient convenir en tous points 4 un autre, et que pour cela un 
autre code est suivi en Egypte, province. faisant partie des états de 
Empire Ottoman, on se conformera aux réglemens de la Sublime Porte; 
mais, pourtant, on agira d’aprés les exigences locales et les dispositions 
des habitans, et suivant les régles de l’équité. 

Chaque fois que le poste sera devenu vacant, le Sultan accordera 
a celui qui sera nommé par la Sublime Porte Gouverneur d’Egypte, la 
faveur de venir 4 Constantinople pour faire ses remercimens, et pour 
offrir les hommages légitimes de ses respects. 

Un firman Impérial concu dans le sens de la décision prise de 
concert avec MM. les Représentans des Hautes Cours Alliées, et orné 
en haut d’un Hatti Shériff, et un autre firman Impérial concernant le 
quantum du tribut, ont été envoyés avec Kiémal Effendi, Khodjoghian 
du Divan Impérial, & Son Excellence Hadji Said Muhib Effendi, un 
des principaux fonctionnaires de la Sublime Porte et Ministre actuel 
de la Justice, qui se trouve 4 Alexandrie, afin qu’ils vous soient pré- 
sentés par son intermédiaire. 

Les concessions et les faveurs insignes et sans pareilles accordées 
a Votre Altesse 4 présent, en sus de celles dont elle a déja été Vobjet, 
étant de la plus haute portée, et les Ministres de la Sublime Porte 
étant intimément persuadés que Votre Altesse saura, d’aprés la sagacité © 
qui la caractérise, apprécier 4 leur juste valeur les bienfaits signalés 

welle vient de recevoir de la part de Sa Majesté Impériale, il y a lieu 
d’espérer et de s’attendre que, remplissant désormais le devoir de la 
reconnaissance pour ces insignes faveurs souveraines, Votre Altesse fera 
tout son possible de prouver dans chaque occasion la fidélité et le 
dévouement dont elle fait profession; et qu’étant un des principaux 
Ministres de la Sublime Porte, Votre Altesse mettra tout en ceuvre pour 
rendre de concert avec nous de bons services 4 notre Padichah légitime et 
notre bienfaiteur. 

A la réception donc des firmans, Votre Altesse les fera lire en public; 
elle exécutera a la lettre les ordres et les conditions réglementaires qu’ils 
renferment; elle payera dés que le temps en sera venu, le tribut annuel 
qui a été fixé, d’aprés les produits et les revenus de l’Egypte, a 80,000 | 
bourses, et elle consignera en entier au trésor Impérial les arrérages 
accumulés, ainsi que cela est dit dans le firman qui vous a été envoyé il 
y a quelque temps. Tels étant aussi les ordres de Sa Hautesse, il faudra 
vous y conformer. 

Il n’y a rien a dire quant aux concessions et aux conditions de la 
Sublime Porte, et il est, par conséquent, hors de doute que, conseillée 
par ses propres lumiéres, Votre Altesse s’empressera de faire tout ce qui 
est nécessaire, et d’en témoigner toute votre reconnaissance. Cependant 
si, contre toute attente, Votre Altesse montrait quelque hésitation 
relativement au montant du tribut, nous sommes convaincus que comme 
vous conformerez désormais chacun de vos actes a l’obéissance respec- 
tueuse que vous professez, et aux lois de l’équité, Votre Altesse avouera 
et conviendra que la quantité du tribut payé autrefois n’était en rapport 
ni avec le ressources de |’ Egypte, ni avec les devoirs de la fidélité et du 
dévouement 

Enfin, si Votre Altesse fait des observations sur le tribut et sur les 
autres conditions, ce sera l4 une chose inconvenante, et par ce qu’elle 
n’est pas digne d’elle, et par ce qu'elle est contraire 4 la décision des 
Cours Alliées. 

Ma franchise m’a imposé le devoir, et c’est ce qu’exige le parfait 
accord qui va, s’il plait 4 Dieu, et sous les auspices de Sa Hautesse, étre 
établi entre nous, de vous faire les observations ci-dessus, auxquelles il 
faut faire attention; et 3’ai jugé a propos de vous les faire par suite de 
Pamitié sincére et de la bienveillance que j’ai pour vous. 

Jespére que, d’aprés les assurances que vous avez données de vos 
bonnes intentions, de votre zéle et de votre sollicitude pour la prospérité 
de la Sublime Porte, et particuli¢rement pour la conservation de la dignité 
et du bonheur de Sa Majesté Impériale, Votre Altesse écoutera favorable- 


461 


ment les conseils que je lui donne et les observations que je lui fais a 
coeur ouvert ; et qu’elle s’empressera de mettre les firmans a exécution. 
Le retour des Consuls des Quatre Cours a Alexandrie a été différé par 
leurs Gouvernemens jusqu’a ce que votre soumission soit compléte, mais | 
aussit6t qu’da la réception du firman vous vous serez empressé de le 


mettre a exécution, on prendra des mesures pour le retour des Consuls 
a leur poste. | 


(Translation.) 


1 HAVE taken cognizance of the answer which your High- 
ness has sent to me, dated 6 Muharem, 1257, (28 February, 1841,) con- 
taining some representations and demands, and IJ have laid it before His 
Imperiai Majesty. 

His Highness, acting according to the impulse of his magnanimous 
disposition, and the desires of his heart full of kindness to his servants, 
being animated by fresh sentiments of favour for your Highness, and 
having had regard to the kind representations and sincere demands of the 
friendly and allied High Courts, has graciously deigned to grant, among 
the demands which you have made to him, what follows: 

With regard to the succession, the choice is given up, and the succes- 
sion shall devolve, in the male line, upon the eldest of your sons and of 
your grandsons. 

There is no longer a question of the fourth part of the revenues; and 
the tribute to be paid annually, for the province of Egypt, is fixed at a 
certain amount. 

With respect to the military rank, application must be made here 
for authority to appoint Generals of Division and Generals of Brigade; 
but your Highness will be at liberty to appoint up to the rank of Colonel. 

As to the laws of the Empire, the fundamental principles of those laws 
consist in the security of property and life, and in the maintenance of 
honour: legitimate and natural principles which are laid down in the 
Hatti Sheriff of Gulhané, which are, as your Highness knows, general 
laws, that is to say, the constituent elements of every Government, of all 
power, of which they are, so to say, the soul; and which are not suscep- 

' tible, in any country, either of distinction in their application, or of the 
_ least modification. In short, those principles cannot change, either on 
account of the difference of the climate, or on account of the difference in 
the character of men; and it cannot, for instance, be said that they are 
necessary in one country, and that it does not appear that they are so in 
another. But the spirit of legislation and reason require that those prin- 
ciples should be applied in all countries in general and without distinction, 
to all ranks of society, to all classes of subjects, and to all nations. There- 
fore an Imperial firman upon this subject was formally read and published, 
some time since, in Egypt. The divine will and the sovereign commands are 
opposed to any conduct which would be in the least in contravention of 
the fundamental principles in question, and to any change in them. 

There are only particular laws which ought in fact, and simple reason 
daily makes this evident to us, to be adapted to the local wants of every 
country, and even to the character of its inhabitants. For this reason, 
His Highness has deigned to make concessions with regard to tnem, and 
has commanded what follows: 

On condition that the bases of the Hatti Sheriff of Gulhané shall not 
at any time be at all infringed, that all the treaties concluded and to be 
concluded with the friendly Powers shall be carried fully into execution, 
and that in conformity with the treaties of commerce, the old system of 
monopolies shall be entirely abolished, the other laws shall be carried into 
execution in Egypt, with reference as far as possible to local exigencies. 

Although the ‘collection of the taxes is effected in these countries 
by means of Defterdars and of Muhassils, nevertheless if this mode of col. 
lection appears difficult to be applied to the collection of the taxes to be 
levied in Egypt in the name of the Sultan, in that case, and seeing that 


462) - 


the principal object of His Highness is to protect all the subjects of the 
Empire, everywhere and in every respect, from injustice and oppression, 
a-good method, which shall not exceed the limits of justice and discretion, 
shall be adopted in the collection of the taxes. 

As it cannot be properly said, with respect to the other laws and to 
the term of military service, that. the regulations established in one country 
would not be fitting in all points for another, and that on that account 
another code is followed in Egypt, a province forming part of the dominions 
of the Ottoman Empire, the laws of the Sublime Porte must be observed ; 
however, they shall be acted upon according to the local exigencies and the 
dispositions of the inhabitants, and according to the rules of justice. 

Every time that the post shall become vacant, the Sultan shall grant 
to him who shall be appointed by the Sublime Porte Governor of Egypt, 
the favour of coming to Constantinople to make his: acknowledgments, 
and to pay the just homage of his respect. 

An Imperial firman drawn up in the sense of the decision taken in 
concert. with the Representatives of the High Allied Courts, and embel- 
lished above with a Hatti Sheriff, and another Imperial firman concerning . ~ 
the amount of the tribute, have been sent by Kiemal Effendi, Khodjogian 
of the Imperial Divan, to his Excellency Hadji Said Muhib Effendi, one of 
the principal functionaries of the Sublime Porte and the present Minister 
of Justice, who is at Alexandria, in order that they may be presented to 
you by him. 

The concessions and the signal and unparalleled favours now granted - 
to your Highness, besides those of which you have already been the object, _ 
being of the highest importance, and the Ministers of the Sublime Porte 
being firmly persuaded that your Excellency will, with the wisdom which 
characterizes you, know how to appreciate at their just value the signal 
benefits which you have just received at the hands of His Imperial 
Majesty, there is reason to hope and to expect that, henceforth fulfilling - 
the duty of gratitude for those signal sovereign favours, your Highness 
will do all in your power to prove on every occasion the fidelity and devo- 
tion which you profess; and that, being one of the principal Ministers of 
the Sublime Porte, your Highness will use all your endeavours to render 
Pe concert with us good services to our legitimate Padishah and our bene- 

actor. 

On the receipt, then, of the firmans, your Highness will cause them to 
be read in public; you will execute to the letter the orders and conditions. 
of regulation which they contain; you will pay, when the proper time shall 
arrive, the annual tribute which has been fixed, according to the produce 
and revenues of Egypt, at 80,000 purses, and you will deposit in full in 
the Imperial treasury the accumulated arrears, as it is stated in the firman 
which was sent to you some time since. Such being, then, the orders of 
His Highness, you must act in conformity with them. 

There is nothing to be said as to the concessions and the conditions 
of the Sublime Porte, and it is, consequently, beyond a doubt that, guided 
by your own experience, your Highness will hasten to do all that is neces- 
sary, and to testify all your gratitude for them. However, if, contrary to. 
all expectation, your Highness shows any hesitation with respect to the 
amount of the tribute, we are convinced that, as you will henceforth adapt 
all your actions to the respectful obedience which you profess, and to the 
laws of equity, your Highness will admit and agree that the amount of 
tribute formerly paid was not in proportion either to the resources of 
Egypt, or to the duties of fidelity and devotion. 

In short, if your Highness makes observations upon the tribute and 
upon the other conditions, it will be an unsuitable thing, both because it 
is not worthy of you, and because it is contrary to the decision of the 
Allied Courts. 

My sincerity has imposed upon me the duty, which is also required 
by the perfect harmony which will, please God, and under the auspices of 
His Highness, be established between us, of making to you the above 
observations, to which you must pay attention ; and I have thought proper 


_to make them to you in consequence of the sincere friendship and goodwill 
which I entertain for you. 


463 


I hope, from the assurances which you have given of your good inten- 
tions, of your zeal and of your anxiety for the prosperity of the Sublime 
Porte, and particularly for the maintenance of the dignity and happiness 
of His Imperial Majesty, that your Highness will listen favourably to the 
advice which I give you, and to the observations which I make to you in 
_all sincerity ; and that you will hasten to carry the firmans into execution. 
The return of the Consuls of the Four Courts to Alexandria has been 
postponed by their Governments until your submission shall be complete, 
but as soon as upon the receipt of the firman, you shall have hastened to 


carry it into execution, measures will be taken for the return of the Consuls 
to their posts. 


Inclosure 2 in No. 292. 


Visirial letter to Said Muhib Effendi; communicated by the Porte to the 
Representatives of the Allied Courts, May 28, 1841. 


(Traduction.) 


LA lettre détaillée que votre Excellence a écrite en date du 5 Muharem, 
1257 (27 Février, 1841), et celle de Son Altesse Méhémet Ali Pacha, ont 
-été prises en considération par les Ministres, qui ont conféré entre eux 
la-dessus, ainsi qu’avec les Quatre Représentans. 

En conséquence de la décision prise, un firman Impérial contenant 
les conditions réglementaires vous est envoyé avec Kiémal Effendi, un des 
Khodjoghian du Divan Impérial. Vous verrez par ce firman que Sa 
Hautesse qui est douée d’un caractére magnanime, voulant faire éclater 
la bonté de son coeur envers ses serviteurs, et par égard pour des conseils 
dictés par l’amitié, a fait les concessions suivantes: elle renonce au principe 
de l’élection, et la succession sera dévolue, dans la ligne masculine, de 
Vainé a Vainé parmi les fils et les petits-fils; le Tribut est fixé a un tant; 
et l’on pourra aller jusqu’a conférer le grade de Colonel. 

Quant aux Jois de l’empire, comme les principes fondamentaux de ces 
lois, savoir, la streté de la propriété et de la vie, et la conservation de 
Vhonneur, sont insérés dans le Hatti Shériff de Gulhané, et qu’il n’est pas 
permis de les changer, ni d’établir des distinctions quant a leur application, 
il est du devoir de la législation et d’une bonne administration de voir 
-que ces principes soient appliqués partout, complétement, et envers tous 
les sujets. A condition done que ces principes fondamentaux soient mis 
-en pratique scrupuleusement en Egypte, aussi les autres lois y seront 
_exécutées aprés les avoir conciliées, autant que -possible, avec les circon- 

cales. 
ee difficile que la perception des dimes et des taxes qui doivent 
étre prises au nom du Sultan se fasse en Egypte comme elle se fait dans 
les autres parties de l’empire, au moyen de Muhassils, comme l objet que 
‘Von a en vue est de préserver les sujets de Sa Hautesse des injustices et 
des vexations, on adoptera pour la perception des dimes et des taxes un 
bon systéme, un systéme basé sur la modération et | équité. 

Le temps du service et les lois militaires seront établis suivant les 
dispositions des habitans de ces pays la, et avec beaucoup de justice et 
.d@’humanité. 

: note sont les ordres de Sa Hautesse. 

Ainsi que votre Excellence le sait, les revenus de l’Egypte montent 
-& présent a 700,000 ou 800,000 bourses. Bien que par suite des 
-principes d’équité qui vont étre adoptés, et de l’abolition du systéme 
-nuisible des monopoles, cette somme puisse diminuer un peu, les revenus 
-réels monteront annuellement 4 400,000 ou 500,000 bourses. Supposons 
.done que sur cette somme ou dépense 100,000 bourses pour l’armée, et la 
flotte, 100,000 bourses pour |’administration interieure, et 100,000 bourses 
pour les dépenses particuliéres, encore restera-t-il un excédant de 100,000 
; bourses. ; : 
a er eonidérons aussi que tandis que jusqu’a présent on entretenait 


464 


une armée de plus de 100,000 hommes, cette armée va étre réduite, et 
portée seulement 4 18,000 hommes, ce qui fait épargner les dépenses de 
l’entretien de 70 ou 80,000 hommes, dépenses qui montent pour le moin 

a 90,000 bourses. hay 

La capitation et la dime sur les produits n’appartiennent de droit 4 
personne; c’est la propriété légitime du trésor public des Musulmans. 
Voila done trois sources d’ot dérivent des sommes immenses. Ainsi il 
faudrait payer annuellement a la Sublime Porte, sur les revenus réels de 
VEgypte, un tribut pour le moins de 100,000 bourses. Mais afin qu'il ne 
reste plus lieu 4 aucune dispute, et que les habitans de ces pays la ne 
soient pas molestés a cet égard lorsqu’ils sont sous les auspices de Sa 
Hautesse, qui est animée de sentimens pleins de modération et déquité, 
Sa Hautesse a décidé que la province d’Egypte payera a la Sublime Porte 
un tribut annuel de 80,000 bourses, et elle a fait écrire un firman exprés 
pour cela. 

Il y des Sandjaks, tels par exemple qu’Aidin et Saroukhan, qui n’ont 
pas la moitié de l’étendue de Egypte, et dont le tribut annuel, sans y 
comprendre les dimes, la capitation, et la douane, monte a 30,000 ou 
40,000 bourses. 

Comme le tribut fixé pour une contrée aussi vaste que Egypte, a 
80,000 bourses par an, est tout a fait dans les bornes de la modération, 
Méhémet Ali a trop de jugement et de sagacité pour faire des difficultés 4 
cet égard. Cependant si, contre notre attente, il faisait des objections a 
ce sujet, vous lui ferez les raisonnemens ci-dessus, en ajoutant que ses 
excuses ne sont pas convenantes, et que ce n’est pas ainsi qu’il doit cor- 
respondre aux faveurs souveraines dont il a été l'objet. Vous tacherez de 
faire dresser et de prendre l’acte y relatif, et de faire prendre l’engage- 
ment formel de payer un moment plus tét les arrérages qu’on sait. 

Aprés avoir fait lire en public le Firman Impérial qui contient les 
conditions réglementaires, et aprés que le Pacha aura pris engagement 
de s’empresser d’exécuter soigneusement et mot a mot toutes les dispo- 
sitions qu’il renferme, vous prendrez des dépéches analogues, et vous étes 
autorisé 4 retourner ici, vi que votre séjour prolongé a Alexandrie 
n’aurait plus d’objet. Vous aurez soin de rapporter avec vous le Firman 
Impérial qui contenait les premiéres conditions et qui est orné d’un Haitti 
Shériff. 


(Translation.) 


THE detailed letter which your Excellency wrote on the 5th Muha- 
rem, 1257, (27th February, 1841,) and that of his Highness Mehemet Ali 
Pasha, have been taken into consideration by the Ministers, who have 
conferred with each other, as well as with the Four Representatives, 
thereupon. 

In consequence of the decision taken, an Imperial firman containing 
the legislative stipulations is sent to you by Kiemal Effendi, one of the 
Khodjoghian of the Imperial Divan. You will see by this firman, that 
His Highness, who is endowed with a magnanimous disposition, desiring 
to make manifest the kindness of his heart towards his servants, and out of 
regard for advice dictated by friendship, has made the following conces- . 
sions: He gives up the principle of election, and the succession will 
devolve, in the male line, from eldest to eldest, among the sons and grand- 
sons; the tribute is fixed at a certain amount; and it will be permitted to 
appoint up to the rank of Colonel. 

With respect to the laws of the Empire, as the fundamental principles 
of those laws, namely, the security of life and property, and the mainte- 
nance of honour, are inserted in the Hatti Sheriff of Gulhané, and as it is 
impossible to change them, or to establish distinctions with respect to 

_ their application, it is the duty of legislation and of a good administration 
to see that those principles are applied everywhere, thoroughly, and to 
all subjects. On condition, then, that those fundamental principles shall 
be scrupulously carried into execution in Egypt, the other laws also shall 
be executed there after they shall have been reconciled, as much as pos- 
sible, with local circumstances. 


465 


If it is difficult to collect the tenths and taxes, which must be levied in 
the name of the Sultan in Egypt, as they are collected in the other parts 
of the Empire, by means of Muhassils, since the object in view is to protect 
the subjects of His Highness from injustice and oppression, a good system 
shall be adopted for the collection of the tenths and taxes; a system founded 
on moderation and justice. 

_ The term of service and the military laws shall be established accord- 
ing to the dispositions of the inhabitants of those countries, and with much 
justice and humanity. 

These are the orders of His Highness. 


As your Excellency knows, the revenues of Ezypt now amount to 
700,000 or 800,000 purses. Although in dannncrtes of the principles of 
equity which are about to be adopted, and of the abolition of the hurtful 
system of monopolies, that sum may be a little diminished, the real 
revenues will amount annually to from 400,000 to 500,000 purses. Let us 
suppose, then, that of this sum, 100,000 purses are spent for the army and 
the fleet, 100,000 purses for the internal administration, and 100,000 
purses for the private expenses, there will still remain a surplus of 100,000 
or 200,000 purses. 

And let us also consider that, whilst hitherto an army of more than 
100,000 men has been maintained, that army will be reduced, and will 
amount only to 18,000 men, which will save the expense of maintaining 
70 or 80,000 men, an expense which amounts at the least to 90,000 purses. 

_. The capitation tax and the tenth of the produce belong to nobody by 
right; it is the lawful property of the public treasury of the Mussulmans. 
Here then are four sources from which immense sums are derived. There- 
fore a tribute of at the least 100,000 purses, out of the real revenues of 
Egypt, should be annually paid to the Sublime Porte. But in order that 
there may no longer remain any cause of dispute, and that the inhabitants 
of those countries may not be molested in this respect when they are 
under the auspices of His Highness, who is animated by feelings full of 
moderation and equity, His Highness has decided that the province of 
‘Egypt shall pay to the Sublime Porte an annual tribute of 80,000 purses, 
‘and he has caused a firman to be written expressly to that effect. 

There are Sandjaks, such for instance as Aidin and Saroukhan, which 
‘are not of half the extent of Egypt, and of which the annual tribute, not 
‘including the tenths, the capitation tax, and the custom-house duties, 
amounts to 30,000 or 40,000 purses. 

As the tribute fixed for so vast a country as Egypt, at 80,000 purses 
a year, is entirely within the bounds of moderation, Mehemet Ali has too 
‘much judgment and wisdom to make difficulties in that respect. How- 
ever, if, contrary to our expectation, he should make objections upon this 
matter, you will use the above arguments to him, adding that his excuses 
are not proper, and that it is not thus that he ought to reply to the 
sovereign favours of which he has been the object. You will endeavour 
to cause the deed relative thereto to be drawn up, and take charge of 
“it, and to cause a formal engagement to be taken that the arrears which 

‘are known shall be paid at the earliest possible moment. 

After having caused the Imperial firman, which contains the con- 
ditions of regulation, to be read in public, and after the Pasha shall have 
made an engagement to lose no time in executing carefully, word for 

-word, all the stipulations which it contains, you will take despatches 
to that effect, and you are authorized to return here, as there would no 
longer be any object in your prolonged stay at Alexandria. You will 
take care to bring back with you the Imperial firman which contained the 
first conditions, and which is embellished with a Hatti Sheriff. 


3 0 


466 


No, 293. 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received June 26.) 


My Lord, Therapia, June 8, 1841. 


I HAVE the honour to inclose copy of extracts of reports communi- 
cated by the Austrian Consul-General at Alexandria, on the number of 
troops returned from the Hedjaz and Syria, with remarks on the causes 
which have led to its being exaggerated. 

I have, &c., 


(Signed) PONSONBY. 


Inclosure in No. 293. 


Extract of Reports received from Egypt by the Austrian Embassy in 
Constantinople. 


Constantinople, June 4, 1841. 


THE War Office estimates the troops returned from the Hedjaz and | 
from Syria together at 48,718 men, and those who were in Egypt in 1840 
at 28,696. 

These numbers are exaggerated at least by two-fifths; and from 
official reports it may be deduced that while the commanding officers 
had two reasons for overrating their troops, the real forces never were 
above 42,000 men, viz. 9,000 men returned from the Hedjaz, 18,000 men 
returned from Syria, and the rest, composed of sedentary troops (militia), 
invalids, and effective troops in Egypt, distributed between Cairo, the 
Delta, and Alexandria. 

The two reasons for which the commanding officers are interested in 
making out returns above the real strength of their corps are as fol- 
lows :— . 

1. The fear of being ill-used by the Pasha, for not having taken care 
of their men, and this would have sufficed to make them lose their com- 
Missions. 

2. Pecuniary interests; because the commanding officers draw pay 
and allowances for rations according to the returns which they make. 

As soon as the Syrian army had returned by the three roads of the 
Desert vid El Arish and Damietta, it was found that matters stood not as 
they were represented, and it was given out that about 33,000 men had 
been disbanded, while only a great many were sent into hospital, where 
Hiei, fevers, typhus, plague, and dysentery, are miserably destroying 
them. 

It is supposed, and not without reason, that the return of the army, 
according to the organization of the 15th March ultimo, amounting to 
87,440 combatants, is altogether imaginary; and that, in reality, Egypt 
possesses only the cadres of two regiments of Guards, twelve of 
Infantry, two of Veterans, nine of Cavalry, three of Artillery, besides 
some irregular Infantry and Artillery, in all 50,000 men, exclusively of 
the Marine forces, which may be estimated at the outside at 5,400 men. 


No. 294. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received June 26.) 


My Lord, Therapia, June 8, 1840: 

_ I SEND you a return (which I have before submitted to your Lord- 
ship) in order to call your attention to the statement therein made of the 
number of troops actually in the service of Mehemet Ali, because although 


467 
the examination* of the facts made b 


geration of that statement, it is nevertheless important that what Mehemet 

Ali intends and is aiming at effecting, and has thought proper to publish, 

should be made evident to you; and the statement is known to exhibit it. 
. I have &c., 

(Signed) PONSONBY. 


y M. Laurin may prove the exag- 


LE RE 


Inclosure in No. 294. 
State of the Egyptian Army in 1840 and 1841. 


Situation de ?_ Armée avant les Hostiliiés. 


386 Régimens d’Infanterie complets : - - 118,080 
3 33 de Garde : - - - 9,840 
15 . de Cavalerie - - E - 11,880 
4) * Artillerie de 12 Bataillons - - 12,000 
2 Bataillons de Génie - - - - * 1,600 
2 Régimens d’Invalides - - 6,560 


Troupes Turques Irréguliéres, Cavalerie, Infanterie, Mogrebins 31,650 


Artillerie Turque - - “ ete 9,850 
Bédouins du Hedjaz et Syrie “ “ : 8,000 
Marine - - - . - sf 12,000 
Total 221,460 
Division de V Armée. 
En Eaypre. 
2 Régimens d’Infanterie - - - - 6,560 
] . Artillerie - : - | 2,400 
3 7 Cavalerie - - - =e et O 
2 Invalides - - - - 6,560 
Artillerie Turque Irréguliére - - - 1,600 
Cavalerie et Infanterie Irréguliére - - 8,400 
1 Bataillon du Génie - - - - 800 
Total 28,696 
Au Hepsaz 
10 Régimens d’Infanterie - - - - 32,800 
lt Compagnie Chasseurs - - - 84 
i. Vétérans - - - C 102 
3 Batteries d’Artillerie  - - - - 600 
Artillerie Turque Irréguliére _ - - = Nl 400 
Cavalerie et Infanterie Irréguliére - - 9,650 
Bédouins du Hedjaz - - - - 1,000 
Total 44,636 
Au SENNAR. 

3 Régimens d’Infanterie —- : . a 

Cavalerie Turque Irréguliére - : zs 


Total 10,640 


* See inclosure in No. 293. 


3 02 


468 


En CanpiE 

1 Régiment d’Infanterie - - - - 3,280 
Artillerie Turque Irréguliére - - - 400 
Cavalerie et Infanterie Irréguliére - - ~ 350 
Total 4,030 

En Syrie. 
23 Régimens d’Infanterie - > - - 75,440 
12 - de Cavalerie - - - ' 9,504 
4 3 d’ Artillerie - > - - 9,600 
Cavalerie et Infanterie Irrégulitre - - 21,000 
Artillerie Irréguliére - - - - 4,800 
Bédouins de Syrie - - - - 7,000 


Total 127,344 


Apres Vévacuation de Syrie et du Hedjaz. 


Rentres pu HepJaz. 


10 Régimens d’Infanterie incomplets - - - 15,000 
1 Compagnie de Chasseurs - - - 4 
3 Batteries d’Artillerie - - - - 320 


Total 15,366 


De La SyRIE. 


5 Régimens d’Infanterie - - - - 16,400 
2 Bataillons d’Infanterie - - - - 1,600 
6 Régimens de Cavalerie - - - - 4,752 
Z ‘3 d’Artillerie —- - - - 4,800 
Cavalerie et Infanterie Irréguliére - - - 5,200 
Artillerie Turque - - - - 600 


Total 33,352 


Troupes qui existent en Egypte apres la nouvelle réorganisation 
du 15 Mars, 1841. 


12 Régimens d’Infanterie compris les 2 de Gardes_ - - 39,360 
2 Bataillons de Garde - = ‘ ~ 1,600 
2 Régimens de Vétérans - - ie - 6,560 

4 de Cavalerie - - - - 7,128 
; d’Artillerie . - - - - 7,200 
Troupes Irréguliéres Turques, Cavalerie et Infanterie 12,600 
Artillerie Turque - - = = 2,200 
Marine - - - * - - 10,800 


Total 87,448 
_ Le méme nombre de Troupes qui étaient au Sennar et en Candie 
existent encore. 


Caire, le 22 Avril, 1841. 


469 


(Translation.) 


Situation of the Army before the Hostilities. 


38 Regiments of Infantry complete ~ - ~ 118,000 
of the Guard - - - 9.840 

15 % of Cavalry - - - 11,880 
5 shi of Artillery of 12 Battalions ~ - 12,000 
2 Battalions of Engineers - - - - 1,600 
2 Regiments of Invalids - ¢ 6,560 
Irregular Turkish Troops, Cavalry, Infantry, Mogrebins - 31,650 
Turkish Artillery - 9,850 
Bedouins of the Hedjaz and Syria, - - - 8,000 
Navy - - - - 12,000 


Total 221,460 


Division of the Army. 


In Eaypr. 

2 Regiments of Infantry - . > 6,560 
] ve of Artillery - - “. 2,400 
] Gs of Cavalry ~ - - - 2,376 
2 of Invalids - - - - 6,560 
Irregular Turkish Artillery - - - 2 1,600 

a3 Cavalry and Infantry - - - 8,400 

1 Battalion of Engineers | - - - - 800 


Total 28,696. 


In THE HeEpsaz. 


10 Regiments of Infantry - - - - 32,800 


1 Company of Chasseurs - * - - 84 
1 ny of Veterans - - - - 102 
3 Batteries of Artillery - . - 600 
Irregular Turkish Artillery ony - - - 4,00 
Cavalry and Infantry - - - 9,650 

Bedouins of the Hedjaz ~ - - - 1,000 


Total 44,636 
In SENNAAR. 


3 Regiments of Infantry - - - 9,840 
Irregular Turkish Cavalry : Ws - 800 


Total 10,640 


In Canpia. 
1 Regiment of infantry - © - - 3,280 
Irregular Turkish Artillery * . : 4.00 
»» Cavalry and Infantry ° ° - 350 


Total 4,030 


470 


In Syria 
23 Regiments of Infantry - - - - 75,440 
12 by of Cavalry - - 9,504 
4 33 of Artillery - - - - 9,600 
Irregular Cavalry and Infantry - - - 21,000 
f Artillery - - - - 4,800 
Bedouins of Syria - - - - 7,000 


Total 127,344 


After the Evacuation of Syria and the Hedjaz. 


RETURNED FROM THE HEDJAZ. 


10 Regiments of Infantry incomplete - - - 15,000 
1 Company of Chasseurs - - - - 46 
3 Battalions of Artillery - - - - 320 


Total 15,366 


From Syria. 


5 Regiments of Infantry - - - - 16,400 
2 Battalions of Infantry _- - - - 1,600 
6 Regiments of Cavalry - - - - 4,752 
2 2, OLArtilléry - - - 4,800 

Irregular Cavalry and Infantry - - - 5,200 


Turkish Artillery - - - - 600 


Total 33,352 


Troops in Egypt after the new Reorganization of March 15, 1841. 


12 Regiments of Infantry, including the 2 of Guards - 39,360 
2 Battalions of Guard —- - - - 1,600 
2 Regiments of Veterans - - - 6,560 

- of Cavalry - = - - 7,128 
. of Artillery - - - - 7,200 
Irregular Turkish Troops, Cavalry and Infantry - 12,600 
Turkish Artillery . - We z 2,200 
Navy Z é = = - 10,800 


Total 87,448 


' The same number of Troops which were in Sennaar and in Candia are 
still there. 


Cairo, April-22, 1824. 


No. 295. 
Mr. Bulwer to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received June 27 ) 


My Lord, ; HE i Paris, June 25, 1841, 
orl GUIZOT has received despatches from Alexandria dated the 6th 
inst., at which period the firman was not arrived. 

The Count Chabot had had an interview, however, (as M. Guizot 


47) 


informed me) with the Viceroy, and informed him, that the French Go- 

vernment considered the conditions which the Sultan now offered reason- 

able, and that no aid or countenance was to be expected from France, 
should they be refused. 

M. Guizot seemed to say that the only point on which resistance 

could be expected was the tribute, which the Pasha spoke of as excessive. 

I have, &c., 
(Signed) HENRY L. BULWER. 


No. 296. 
Mr. Bloomfield to Viscownt Palmerston.—( Received June 28.) 


(Extract.) St. Petersburgh, June 19, 1841. 


A COPY of the firman forwarded by the Porte to Alexandria has 
arrived here, and Count Nesselrode seems to think it may, perhaps, be 
accepted in toto by Mehemet Ali, or at all events with some unimportant 
modifications. 

Count Nesselrode has received a report from Baron Brunnow of the 
condition which the French Government wished to impose on the Four 
Powers, of annulling the Treaty of July, before they would consent to sign 
the initialed Convention, and entirely approves of the view taken by Her 
Majesty’s Government of this proposal, as detailed by your Lordship to 
the members of the Conference. 


No. 297. 
Mr. Vice-Consul Chasseaud to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received July 2.) 


Her Britannic Majesty's Consulate, 
My Lord, Alexandria, June 16, 1841. 


I HAVE the honour to inform your Lordship that on the 7th instant, 
late in the evening, a Russian steam-vessel, the “Sitasch,” arrived here 
from Constantinople, bringing Kiamil Effendi, officer from the Porte, who 
was the bearer of the expected firman, which Mehemet Ali having 
accepted, the ceremony of its being read in public took place on the 
10th imstant in the forenoon, when a salute was fired from the forts and 
the Egyptian shipping in port on the occasion, announcing the event. 

I took advantage of the return to Constantinople of the Russian 
steam-vessel, which left this on the 11th in the morning, and had the honour 
of addressing Viscount Ponsonby, acquainting his Excellency with the 


occurrence. 
I have, &c., 
(Signed) G. CHASSEAUD, 


Vice-Consul. 


a  ————— 


No. 298.: nye ‘ 


Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—(Received July 9.) 


My Lord, Therapia, June 16, 1841. 


THE French steamer on the 14th brought letters here (one being 
from a person well known to possess the best information in Alexandria) 
stating the intention of Mehemet Ali to refuse the new firman. Mehemet 
Ali had not received the firman when the above letters were written, but 
had received accounts of its contents. Mehemet Ali may alter his 


472 


intentions before he sends back an answer tothe firman. He may have 

had reasons for expressing an intention to refuse; it is probable that he 

will do something to gain time. I am of opinion now, as I have always 

been, that he never will carry into execution the measures ordered by the 
Sultan under the advice of the Great Powers. Ios) 
I have, &c., 

(Signed) PONSONBY. 


No. 299. 
Viscount Ponsonby to Viscount Palmerston.—( Received July 8.) 


My Lord, | Therapia, June 21, 1841. 


NO doubt but your Lordship will have heard from Alexandria long 
before this arrives in London, that Mehemet Ali has accepted the -firman. 
I however think it right to inclose the despatch I received this day from 
Alexandria, reporting this satisfactory intelligence. 

IT have, &c., 
(Signed) PONSONBY 


Inclosure in No. 299. 
Mr. Vice-Consul Chasseaud to Viscount Ponsonby. 


| Her Britannic Majesty’s Consulate, 
My Lord, Alexandria, June 10, 1841. 


I HAVE the honour to inform your Excellency, that on the 11th 
instant, late in the evening, the Russian steam-vessel, ‘‘Sitasch,” arrived 
here bringing Kiamil Effendi, officer of the Porte, bearer of the firman 
to Mehemet Ali; and that next morning I was informed from good autho- 
rity, that Mehemet Ali had declared that he accepted the new conditions 
therein contained. Accordingly, this forenoon the firman was read in 
public at the palace, and a salute was fired from the forts and the Egyp- 
tian shipping on the occasion, announcing the event. 

_ On the 8th instant, Hadji Ali Pasha appointed for Jeddah arrived 
here in a sailing vessel, . 
| I have, &c., | 
(Signed) G. CHASSEAUD, 
Vice-Consul. 


‘473 


No.- 300. 


PROTOCOLE dune Conférence tenue au Foreign Office, 
10 Juillet, 1841. 


~ Présens: 


Les Plénipotentiaires 

@’ Autriche ; 

de la Grande Bretagne ; 
de Prusse ; 

de Russie ; et 

de la Turquie. 


LES difficultés dans lesquelles Sa Hautesse le Sultan s’est trouvé 
placé, et qui ont déterminé a réclamer l’appui et assistance des Cours 
d’Autriche, de la Grande Bretagne, de Prusse, et de Russie, venant d’étre 
“applanies, et Méhémet Ali ayant fait envers Sa Hautesse le Sultan l’acte 
de soumission que la Convention du 15 Juillet était destinée 4 amener, les 
Représentans des Cours signataires de la dite Convention ont reconnue, 
qu indépendamment de l’exécution des mesures temporaires résultant de 
cette Convention, il importe essentiellement de consacrer, de la maniére 
la plus formelle, le respect dé 4 l’ancienne régle de Empire Ottoman, en 
vertu de laquelle il a été de tout tems défendu aux batimens de guerre 
des Puissances étrangéres d’entrer dans les détroits des Dardanelles et du 
Bosphore. 

Ce principe étant par sa nature d’une application générale et perma- 
nente, les Plénipotentiaires respectifs, munis a cet effet des ordres de 
leurs Cours, ont été d’avis, que pour manifester l’accord et union qui 
president aux intentions de toutes les Cours dans l’interét de l’affermisse- 
ment de la paix Kuropéenne, il conviendrait de constater le respect da au 
principe susmentionné, au moyen d’une transaction a laquelle la France 
serait appelée a concourir, a l’invitation et d’aprés le voeu de Sa Hautesse 

“Je Sultan. 

Cette transaction étant de nature a offrir 4 Europe un gage de 
Vunion des Cing Puissances, le Principal Secrétaire d’Etat de Sa Majesté 
Britannique ayant le Département des Affaires Etrangéres, d’accord avec 
les Plénipotentiaires des Quatre autres Puissances, s’est chargée de porter 
cet objet a la connaissance du Gouvernement Frangais, en l’invitant a 
participer a la transaction par laquelle, d’une part, le Sultan déclarerait 
sa ferme résolution de maintenir a l’avenir le susdit principe ; de l’autre, 
les Cing Puissances annonceraient leur détermination unanime de respecter 
ce principe et de s’y conformer. 


(Signé) ESTERHAZY. NEUMANN. 
PALMERSTON. 
BULOW. 
BRUNNOW. 
CHEKIB. 


3 P 


. a74 


(Translation.) 


PROTOCOL of a Conference held at the Foreign Office, 
July 10, 1841. 


Present: 


The Plenipotentiaries 
of Austria ; 
of Great Britain; — 
of Prussia; 
of Russia; and 
of Turkey. 


THE difficulties in which His Highness the Sultan was placed, and 
which decided him to apply for the support and the assistance of the Courts 
of Austria, Great Britain, Prussia, and Russia, being now removed, and 
Mehemet Ali having made, towards His Highness the Sultan the act of 
submission which the Convention of the 15th of July was designed to bring 
about, the Representatives of the Courts parties to the said Conven- 
tion have considered, that, independently of the execution of the temporary 
measures resulting from that Convention, it is of essential importance 
to record, in the most formal manner, the respect which is due to the 
ancient rule of the Ottoman Empire, in virtue of which it has at all 
times been prohibited for Ships of War of foreign Powers to enter into the 
Straits of the Dardanelles and of the Bosphorus. 

This principle being from its nature one of general and permanent 
application, the respective Plenipotentiaries, provided with the orders of 
their Courts to this effect, have been of opinion that, in order to manifest 
the agreement and union which regulate the intentions of all the Courts in 
what concerns the maintenance of the peace of Europe, it would be proper 
to record, the respect which is due to the above-mentioned principle, by 
means of an arrangement in which France should be invited to concur, 
at the invitation, and agreeably to the wish, of the Sultan. 

This arrangement being calculated to afford to Europe a pledge of 
the union of the Five Powers, Her Britannic Majesty’s Principal Secre- 
tary of State for Foreign Affairs, agreeably to an understanding with the 
Plenipotentiaries of the Four Powers, undertook to bring this matter to 
the knowledge of the French Government, requesting it to take part in an 
arrangement by which, on the one hand, the Sultan should declare his 
firm resolution to maintain for the future the above-mentioned principle ; 
the Five Powers, on the other hand, should announce their unanimous 
determination to respect that principle and to conform themselves thereto. 


(Signed) ESTERHAZY. NEUMANN. 
PALMERSTON. 
~BULOW. 
BRUNNOW. 
CHEKIB. 


No. 301. 
Viscount Palmerston to Viscount Ponsonby. 


(Extract.) Foreign Office, July 13, 1841. 
I HAVE to acquaint your Excellency that the Convention, of which 
a draft was transmitted to you in my despatch of the 16th of March, 


was signed this day by the Plenipotentiaries of Great Britain, Austria, 
France, Prussia, Russia, and Turkey. 


